**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



uti>*t^^^ft^: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



15 l 11291- 138$ 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
TESTING OF COMPUTER BASED SYSTEMS 



ITK f.8l'3L'02 : 620 I : 0Q6'76 




© Cap/tight 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAfcG 

NEW DELHI I1O0OZ 

Gr 4 NottmUr 1M5 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
TESTING OF COMPUTER BASED SYSTEMS 

Computer, Business Machines and CaJcuiators Sectional Committee, 

LTDC 24 

Chairman Representing 

Db N. Seshagibi Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri R. P. Ahuja Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd, New 

Delhi 
Shki C. K. Bapiraju State Bank of India, Bombay 

Shbi S. K. Bhatia Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri P. V. C. Chellapatti Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr Vijay P. Bhatkar Kerala State Electronics Development Corporation 

Ltd, Trivandrum 

Db S. N S. Rajasekrau ( Alternate ) 
Db C. R. Chaksavaetey Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri K. N. Dheeb Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shbi S. P. Gothoskab Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 

Shei Deepak Gupta Tata Electric Companies, Bombay 

Shri R. M. Naib ( Alternate ) 
Dr Mathai Joseph NCSDGT, Tata Institute for Fundamental Research, 

Bombay 

Db S. Ramaiti ( Alternate ) 
Db A. Lahibi Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi 

Shbi N. Laeshmanan Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Shri Aejun Malhotba Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi Abjuh Mbhta ( Alternate ) 
Db S. C. Mehta Steel Authority of India, New Delhi 

Shbi S. L. N. Murthy Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. S. PerinaNayaGam ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Pandey International Computers Indian Manufacturers Ltd, 

Pune 

Shri H. Das ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. R. Prabhu Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

Industries ), New Delhi 

Shri M. Ramakbishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raghukumar Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. N. Pawar ( Alternate ) 
Db V. K. Ravindran PSI Data Systems Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. L. Dehshpande ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction ia whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11291 • 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Prof R. Sad an and a Computer Society of India, Bombay 

Shri Ashis Sen Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta 

Shri Umesh P. Shah ORG Systems, Vadodara 

Shri P. K. Sridharan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Shankraungam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ;, New Delhi 
Shri K. L. Garg ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. G. Sobeamanyan Electronics Trade & Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri Ishwar Dutt ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. N. Swamy Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri V. R. Unniraman Telecommunication Research Centre, New Delhi 

Shri K. M. Viswanathan Hindustan Teleprinters Ltd, Madras 

Shri S. Dbvrajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. S. Rawat 
Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Information Systems and Procedures Subcommittee, LTDC 24 : 3 



Shri C. K. Bapiraju 
Shri S. K. Bhatia 

Shri H. P. Saxbna ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Gothoskar 
Shri M. M. N. Kapor 
Dr R. Shankar 
Shri R. Thiagarajak 
Dr N. Vijayaditya 



State Bank of Computer Centre, Bombay 
Bharat Heavy Electrkals Ltd, New Delhi 

Reserve Bank of India, Bombay 
Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi 
National Information Centre. New Delhi 



IS : 11291 ■ 1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
TESTING OF COMPUTER BASED SYSTEMS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 29 April 1985, after the draft finalized by the Computer 
Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 Computer-based systems are often complex, it is, therefore, necessary 
to test them before, during and sometimes after implementation to ensure 
that they satisfy the user's requirements. The greater the complexity of 
a system, the more likely it is that there will be inherent faults in its 
design and construction. Similarly, the more important a system is to 
the user, the more important it is to discover and eliminate such faults. 
Thus, the tests applied to a complex and important system may need to 
be extremely rigorous, comprehensive, time consuming and expensive. 
Yet even the most comprehensive tests cannot prove beyond all doubt 
that a system is and will remain secure and free from error. 

0.3 User-organizations are, therefore, faced with deciding upon the 
degree of confidence in the systems for which they are able and willing 
to pay. The extent to which they will obtain value for money from 
this task will depend upon their willingness to adopt a logical and 
systematic approach to testing. Similarly, the extent to which they apply 
the total content of this code of practice will depend upon whether the 
system is complex and vital or relatively simple and of less importance. 

0.4 Only the simplest of systems can be tested effectively by a 'one-off' 
system test. In systems of greater complexity, confidence can only be 
established by testing at all stages of development. This testing begins 
by proving the hardware and software components at their most 
elementary level and then integrating then into larger logical testable 
units. This process continues until the next level of integration produces 
the system itself, at which point system testing can begin. This technique 
provides a pyramid of proof and greatly enhances the possibility of early 
detection both of errors and of design misconceptions. 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

0.5 This code of practice is complementary to IS : 11290-1985* and is 
relevant to the same wide range of systems and environments. It is 
concerned with the testing of applications software during and after its 
develpment. Methods of proving hardware are well known and it is 
not the intention of this code of practice to provide advice on hardware 
and operating system software as such. However, it is necessary to test 
the 'nix' of applications software, operating systems software, hardware, 
data and people to ensure that the required results are achieved and, in 
this context, hardware and operating systems software are dealt with in 
this document. 

0.6 The use of this code will enable a new or modified computer system 
to be tested to demonstrate with an acceptable degree of confidence 
that it: 

a) does what it is supposed to do, 

b) does not do what it is clearly not supposed to do, 

c) is physically and operationally secure, 

d) is reliable, 

e) is maintainable and modifiable, and 

f ) continues in service to do what it was designed to do. 

0.7 This code provides guidance on the development of checklists for 
documents under the following headings: 

a) Test strategy, 

b) Test procedures, 

c) Test criteria, 

d) Test plan, 

e) Test specification, 

f ) Test summary, and 

g) System monitoring. 

0.8 These checklists will enable an organization: 

a) to identify a general test strategy appropriate to its applications, 
facilities and modes of operation and that allows variations for 
particular classes of project because computer-based systems are 
not all equal in, for example, their: 

1) timing priorities, 

2) deadlines, 



♦Code of practice for documentation of computer based systems. 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

3) security status, 

4) value to the organization, and 

5) on-going reliability requirements. 

b) to prescribe a specific test plan for each computer-based system 
development project; 

c) to prescribe a specific test plan for each set of modifications or 
enhancements to an existing computer-based system. 

0.9 This document is based on BS 5887 : 1980 Code of practice for 
testing of computer-based systems, issued by British Standards Institution 
( BSI ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code of practice is designed to assist organizations to develop 
and document general test strategies, test plans and procedures that will 
give confidence that the design and implementation of their computer- 
based systems will be of adequate quality for the purpose the systems are 
to fulfil. 

2. DEFINITIONS 

2.1 For the purposes of this standard the definitions given in IS : 1885 
( Part 52 )* series shall apply. 

3. TEST STRATEGY 

3.1 The construction of an effective general test strategy is fundamental 
to successful testing of computer-based systems. Ideally, this strategy 
should be defined at organization or installation level, reviewed whenever 
considered necessary and published for the guidance of all concerned 
with testing computer-based systems. 

Where no such strategy has been defined in this way it will be 
necessary to construct one for each project; the importance of the project 
or the complexity of the project or both will determine the amount of 
detail necessary. 

3.2 In its most comprehensive form the test strategy should include 
information on the following: 

a) testing aids and monitoring techniques that are available and 
their method of use; 



*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 52 Data processing. 

5 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

b) methods that are available for constructing and maintaining test 
data; 

c) communication links between designers, programmers, operators 
and testers regarding testing; 

d) the methods of submitting batch and on-line tests; 

e) turn-round times; 

f ) those responsible for computer operations; 

g) priority testing arrangements; 
h) special testing arrangements; 
j) test team organization; 

k) library control; 

m) document filing; and 

n) test methods currently available together with notes concerning 
the purposes for which each is most appropriate and at which 
level, how effectively and at what cost. 

3,3 The range of possible test methods includes: 

a) design reviews; 

b) simulations; 

c) building prototypes; 

d) desk checking; 

e) code reading; 

f ) bench marks; 

g) parallel running; and 

h) level by level testing, for example through the levels of: 

1) module; 

2) program; 

3) integration; 

4) system; 

5) system interface; 

6) system acceptance. 

4. TEST PROCEDURES 

4.1 Introduction — The execution of a test plan requires the applica- 
tion of orderly and disciplined test procedures designed to implement the 
test strategy effectively. 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

Each organization should produce an installation test ( and re-test ) 
procedure for each test method approved as part of the test strategy. 
Lists of possible actions for pre-test, test, and for post-test are given in 4.2. 
Typically, a test procedure should include each action that is relevant to 
the particular test. 

4.2 Tests 

4.2.1 Pre-test 

a) Nominate an independent approver for the system acceptance 
test It may be desirable to have independent testers for all 
levels of testing, but this does not absolve the creators of the 
system from their responsibilities to test; 

b) Provide test plan; 

c) Provide test specification; 

d) Check that the test specification is adequate to test the software 
to the required level of confidence; 

e) Arrange time and place of test; 

f ) Ensure that the required test facilities are available; 

g) Involve all parties affected, for example user, technical specialists, 
operators, quality assurers; 

h) Ensure that input data and dummy software are defined and 
suitable for the test; 

j) Ensure that data is prepared to test specification; 

k) Ensure that the required test results are fully predetermined; 

m) Ensure that all software required for the test is established and 
tested to an appropriate level of confidence; and 

n) Ensure that, whenever relevant, the on-going system support 
documentation is available for use in the test. 

4.2.2 Test 

a) Conduct test according to test specification, 

b) Prepare records required by test specification, 

c) Take actions required by test specification, 

d) Record all deviations from test specification or test plan, and 

e) Record time and date of test. 

4.2.3 Post-test 

a) Trace origins and meanings of unexpected effects, faults or 
messages; 

b) Correct faults; 

7 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

c) Correct documentation; 

d) Repeat tests required by test specification; and 

e) Complete test documentation ( reports, actions, summary ). 

4.3 It is important that the hardware configuration should not be 
changed during the period of the tests and also that the versions of the 
software used to operate the system can always be traced back to a 
successful test. The test procedures applied should be recorded in 
sufficient detail for it to be possible to retrace the route through the test 
whenever necessary. The procedures should ensure that whenever 
changes are made to the system, all necessary iterations are performed 
to ensure the integrity of the test plan as a whole. In particular, it is 
important to prevent changes made for technical reasons from causing 
the system no longer to carry out the functions for which it was 
designed. 

5.1 TEST CRITERIA 

5.1 At the start of a project, the user will define his needs in his own 
terminology. As the project passes through the successive stages of 
development, these needs will become progressively more refined. They 
will also become translated into the terminology associated with the 
design, programming and operation of computer-based systems. During 
these stages the effect of the system on its environment should also be 
examined and this may indicate the need to impose new conditions or 
restrictions, for example the new system may demand a higher degree of 
computer room security than has hitherto been necessary. 

5.1.1 As the refining process proceeds, the terminology becomes 
definitive and specific, and test criteria will begin to emerge. These 
criteria should explore every aspect of the design and operation of the 
system. They should define the quality levels and standards of perform- 
ance to be achieved by the system, its functions, data and programs. 

5.1.2 These standards may vary at different levels; for example, if a 
system is required to perform calculations the final results of which are 
to be accurate to a tolerance of iO'Ol, supporting calculations may 
need to be restricted to a tolerance of ±0'000 l. 

5.2 The possible range of design criteria and therefore of test criteria 
will be circumscribed by the nature of the organization; its activities and 
its environment. Each kind of organization will value differently the 
various aspects of performance of its systems, for example the need to 
meet specific standards of: 

a) design testability; 

b) accuracy; 

c) deadline; 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

d) priority structure; 

e) response time; 

f) back-up; 

g) recovery; 

h) reconfiguration; 
j) security; 
k) privacy; 
m) reliability; 
n) robustness; 
p) modularity; 
q) portability; 
r) maintainability; 
s) mo difiability; 
t) enhanceability; 
u) interfaces; and 
v) documentation; 

within agreed constraints of : 

1) development time; 

2) development costs; 

3) running costs; 

4) maintenance costs; 

5) operating efficiency; and 

6) capacity. 

6. TEST PLAN 

6.1 The test plan should be a list of all the tests necessary to prove a 
system and should be arranged to show: 

a) the sequence in which tests are to be conducted; 

b) the level at which each test is to be conducted; 

c) the interdependencies between tests; and 

d) the hierarchical relationship of all tests in the plan. 

The test plan should include: 

i) all the tests necessary to satisfy the user before the system goes 
into service; 

ii) the adequacy of documentation; and 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

iii) all the necessary monitoring, diagnostic and other on-going 
support plans. 

The extent of these tests and the frequency with which they are 
applied should be appropriate to the importance of the system and the 
cost of performing the on-going support. 

In order to achieve these aims, test plans will usually be required to 
provide for 'negative testing', as well as for 'positive testing' particularly 
at the lower levels of test. Negative testing is required to prove that a 
system will reject false data or instructions and will not perform functions 
it is supposed to prevent. 

6.2 A test plan should normally be constructed in an hierarchical manner 
from the top down, although it may be implemented from the bottom up 
that is from the smallest testable components of the system to be tested to 
the interfaces between this and other systems. 

The design criteria for a system of little importance, for example 
where the cost of failure is low, should not generate a plan that will test 
the system to any great depth or extent. On the other hand, if the 
system design is complex or if the system is of vital importance, the 
preparation of a comprehensive test plan becomes essential. It is 
essential that the test plan identifies the sequential and logical relation- 
ships of tests that may need, for example: 

a) to be conducted at more than one level; 

b) to prove different standards of performance; 

c) to prove the integrity of interfaces with other systems; and 

d) to prove the security of a data base against intrusion. 

7. CONTENTS OF TEST SPECIFICATION 

7.1 From the test criteria it is possible to specify individual tests to apply 
and at which level each test should be applied. It is important to select 
and apply tests that will truly verify what they are intended to establish. 
The test methods should themselves be tested initially, and confidence in 
them should be reaffirmed at appropriate intervals. Clearly, some tests 
will need to be applied at only one level while others, such as the 
calculation example cited in 5.1. will need to be applied, perhaps with 
different limits, at more than one level. 

7.1.1 Typically, the contents of a test specification should specify the 
following: 

a) What is to be tested, for example, a test, an interface, a system, a 
function, a program, a component of a program, elements of 
data, documents. 

10 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

b) What the test needs to establish, that is, that what is to be tested 
does what it is supposed to do and maintains its integrity against 
attempts to make it do what it is not supposed to do. 

c) Whether the test is to stand alone. 

d) What reiated tests are to procede, to be made concurrently with 
or to follow the test. 

e) The conditions in which the test is to take place, that is normal 
or abnormal, and, if abnormal, the degree of abnormality. 

f ) When the test is to take place, for example in what month, week, 
day, shift, hour; in a normal test period, in real scheduled time. 

g) The data and the files to be used; the 'before anda fter' conditions 
of the files; all of the possible system input and output media; 
and the formats, values, limits and tolerances to be allowed. 

h) The test method to be used, with an explanation of how it will 
provide the required level of confidence. 

j) The version numbers of the test aids or diagnostics that are to be 
used in the test. 

k) What configuation(s) are to be used and where, for example own 
equipment or other; on-site or elsewhere. All hardware, 
software versions and people should be listed together with the 
environmental conditions in which the test is to be conducted. 

m) The operating ( console ) messages expected. 

n) What analyses of results are to be made, and by whom. 

p) What traces of the test route and what records of the test are to 
be kept, and for what period of time. 

q) Whether it is necessary to repeat a test: 

i) if it fails; 

ii) in different specified conditions; 
and how many repetitions are considered necessary, together 
with the actions to be taken if these repetitions fail to produce 
the required results. 

r) Significance of the test for the system as a whole. 

7.2 Whatever levels of testing may be deemed necessary during system 
development, equal consideration should be given to monitoring the 
system in service. Where the importance of the system requires that on- 
going monitoring procedures are applied, the design of these procedures 
should also be tested to ensure that they monitor the system effectively. 

11 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

Associated with the specification of individual tests and monitoring 
procedures are the methods by which these may be conducted. The 
capacity of an organization to conduct a particular test and the freedom 
of choice where there are alternative methods are usually limited. 
Limitations may be imposed by the available hardware, software or 
personnel. Reference to the test criteria and the test strategy should 
enable an organization to determine quickly whether it possesses the 
means and techniques to test a new system to the user's design criteria. 
If it cannot conduct these tests, it may then consider what action to take; 
for example: 

a) lease or purchase whatever hardware, software, techniques or 
skills that are necessary; 

b) reconfigure to provide the necessary facility ( if this is a practical 
alternative ); and 

c) accept and put on record the imperfections in the tests. 

8. CONTENTS OF TEST SUMMARY 

8.1 In addition to the certificate of acceptance, a test summary should 
be prepared for inclusion in the handover report. The test summary 
should be a formal summarized statement; prepared from the results of 
carrying out the test plan, and recording those aspects in which the 
system, although acceptable, has failed to satisfy the design criteria 
completely. Typically, the test summary should emphasize: 

a) deficiencies that the user agrees to accept and about which no 
further action is to be taken; 

b) deficiencies that the user agrees to tolerate as temporary conces- 
sions, but which are to be corrected; 

c) courses of action that are required to be taken and the period of 
time by which they are to be completed. 

8.2 The test summary should also provide a guide, derived from the 
design criteria and the deficiencies mentioned in 8.1 to: 

a) degree of monitoring of the system in service that will be 
necessary; 

b) identification of potential maintenance problems; and 

c) precautions to be observed in considering future extensions or 
enhancements to the system. 

12 



IS : 11291 - 1985 

9. SYSTEM MONITORING 

9.1 Systems that are particularly important to the user and have one or 
more critical qualities should be monitored while in use. This monitor- 
ing should include confirmation that the system continues to achieve, for 
example, its: 

a) deadlines; 

b) prescribed standards of accuracy; 

c) priority status; 

d) level of security; 

e) protection of privacy; 

f ) response time; and ■ 

g) level of reliability. 

9.2 It may also be necessary to monitor the continued effectiveness of 
essential system support facilities such as: 

a) back-up; 

b) recovery; 

c) reconfiguration; and 

d) operating software. 

9.3 The degree and frequency of monitoring should be determined by 
the relative importance of the system. 

Any reports produced from such monitoring should contain all the 
infoimation available for corrective action to be taken and should be 
sent to person with the authority to take such action. 

9.4 The methods of monitoring may include the following, which may 
be carried out periodically or randomly or both: 

a) applications of repeatable tests, built-in or manual; 

b) recording of data volumes, timings, response times, paging rates, 
etc; 

c) dependency checks or interface checks or both; and 

d) confirmation of the state of the environment in which the system 
operates ( a change state could upset the planned system/environ- 
ment balance and diminish or destroy the value of the system as 
originally designed ). 



13 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 

Base Unit* 



QUANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mass 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


s 


Electric current 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


Cando.U 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 


Supplementary Unit* 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 


Derived Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Force 


newton 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 
1 N = 1 kg.m/s 1 
1 J = I N.m 
1 W = 1 J/s 
1 Wb = 1 V.s 
1 T = 1 Wb/m« 
1 Hz = 1 c/s (s" 1 ) 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V = 1 W/A 
1 Pa = 1 N/m* 



