*••*•*•••****••• 



• te^R: 



• 



w*z * 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New' 



2$&\ \ I *>?«*^n«S?C 



IS 10037-2 (1983) : Requirements for sludge de-watering 
equipment, Part 2: Vacuum filtration equipment [CED 24 
Public Health Engineering.] 



^llf>^y^V f HUH^sSBSZT 



Z*S*\ \ i »?^>#^N»ft^ 




"5TR ^ V^ ^T STTOT ^T f^TP*T 

Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



^mr x^r -^rr <smhi | sfr # ^an\ ^f ^tt *t^tt f 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



**i*Tr~. 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS; 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard » mC*-- i£*5V' 

REQUIREMENTS FOR "JfciWWlfflD JflW 
SLUDGE DE- WATERING EQUIPMENT 

PART 2 VACUUM FILTRATION EQUIPMENT 



UDC 62ti'336>42 




© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN* 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DF.J.HI 110002 

C» 3 0f/*ft«r 1983 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

Indian Standard 

REQUIREMENTS FOR 
SLUDGE DE-WATERING EQUIPMENT 

PART 2 VACUUM FILTRATION EQUIPMENT 

Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee, BDC 40 

Chairman Representing 

Dr B. B. Stjndaresan National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 

Members 
Shri R. Paramasivam ( Alternate to 
Dr B. B. Sundaresan ) 
Adviser ( PHE ) Ministry of Works & Housing, New Delhi 

Dr S. R. Sukla ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, V. Bop ardikar Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. C. P. Chaudhaby Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Chief Engineer Department of Health, Government of West Bengal, 

Calcutta 
Shri T. N. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Water ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 

Shri Jai Narain ( Alternate ) 
Shri D, K. Choudhury Geo-Miller & Co, Calcutta 

Shri D. R. Mali. ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Dasgupta Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shri S.J. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Municipal Commissio- Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 
Her Bombay 

Hydraulic Engineer ( Alternate I ) 
Chief Engineer ( Sewerage ) ( Alternate II ) 
Shri B. R, N. Gupta Engineer-in-Chiefs Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. V. Krishnamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P.James Local Administration & Social Welfare (F) Depart- 

ment, Trivandrum 
Shri R. Krtshnaswamy Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Shri S. A. Jagdesan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Y. Mad an The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



i S : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. R. Majumdar Paterson Engineering Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shhz A. R. Mir Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar 
Shri G. M. Kanth ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Naik Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Kenkre ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. M. Rahul ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Patel Indian Water Works Association, Bombay 

Representative Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Representative Public Health Engineering Department, 

Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 
Shri K. K. Gandhi ( Alternate ) 
Prof S. Sltbba Rao All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri A. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. P. Sharma M. P. State Prevention and Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Bhopal 
Dr G. K. Khare ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Srivastava Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

Shri S. A. Swamy The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri P. S. Tfndolkar Candy Filters ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. L. Sastri ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Vaidya Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
Shri V. VaradaRajan Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 

Board, Madras 
Shri S. Daivamani ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. K. Avasthy 

Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Waste Water Treatment Equipment Subcommittee, BDC 40 : 2 

Convener 
Prof V, Raman National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( GSIR ), Nagpur 

Members 
Shri S, K. Gadkaki ( Alternate to 
Prof V. Raman ) 
Shri R. R. Bagri Clear Water Ltd, New Delhi 

Chief Engineer ( Design ) U. P. Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

Shri S. S. Suivastava ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Sewerage ) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay 
Deputy Chief Engineer 
( Sewerage ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 9 ) 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

Indian Standard 

REQUIREMENTS FOR 
SLUDGE DE-WATERING EQUIPMENT 

PART 2 VACUUM FILTRATION EQUIPMENT 

0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 28 June 1983, after the draft finalized by the 
Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Sludges produced during sewage treatment contain large percentage 
of water. In many situations it is, therefore, necessary that these should 
be dewatered so that solids obtained after dewatering can be easily 
handled and disposed off. The liquid obtained during dewatering is 
usually returned to the plants inlet. Vacuum filtration is employed to 
separate a solid from its associated liquid by means of a porous media 
which retains the solid but allows the liquid to pass. 

0.3 Among the vacuum filters, the revolving type continuous vacuum 
drum filter is most widely used (see Fig. 1 ). 

0.4 In calculating the size of filter, the desired moisture content of the 
filter cake is one of the factors. If wetter cake content of the filter cake 
is acceptable higher filtration rates and lower coagulant dosage can be 
used. Sometimes for certain sludges, coagulant dosage may not be 
necessary. The filtration rate is expressed in kg of dry solids per square 
metre of medium per hour. It varies from 10 kg/m 2 /h for activated 
sludge alone to 50 kg/m a /h for primary sludges. A design rate of 
15 kg/m a /h is a conservative figure that can be used when the quality of 
sludge and the type of filter to be used are not known. 

0.5 This standard is being published in three parts. Part 2 deals with 
the requirements for vacuum filtration equipment. The other parts in 
the series are given below: 

IS : 10037 ( Part 1 )-1981 Requirements for sludge de-watering equip- 
' ment: Part 1 Sludge drying beds-sand, gravel and underdrains. 

IS : 10037 (Part 3 )-1983 Requirements for sludge de-watering 
equipment: Part 3 Centrifugal equipment ( solid bowl type ). 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 



PNEUMATIC AND 

HYDRAULIC 

SYSTEM 




SLUDGE 
RESERVOIR 



SCRAPER 



SLUDGE 
CAKE 




SLUDGE CAKE 
DROPS OFF 



STRINGS OR COILS 
RETURN TO DRUM 

Fig. 1 General Arrangement of Drum Filter 

0.6 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accord- 
ance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1* SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) lays down requirements for vacuum filtration 
equipment used for sludge de-watering. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

4 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

2. MATERIALS 

2.1 Drum — Depending upon the slurry characteristics, the drum may 
be made out of mild steel conforming to IS: 1977-1975*, mild steel 
rubberlined conforming to IS : 4682 ( Part 1 )-1968"f or stainless steel 
conforming to IS : 691 1-1972 J. For sewage, mild steel should be used 
for the construction of drum. 

2.2 Vat — The vat should be made out of mild steel conforming to 
IS : 1977-1975*. 

2.3 Filter Medium — The filter medium should be of wool, cloth, felt, 
synthetic fibre or plastic or stainless steel mesh or coil spring. 

3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The size of the vacuum filter is dependent upon the amount of slurry 
to be filtered in unit time. Leaf filter test is used for determining the 
most suitable filter medium and for finding out the extent of conditioning 
of sludge required prior to vacuum filtration. The procedure of leaf 
test is given in Appendix A. 

3.2 Generally filters are specified by diameter multiplied by length 
( D x L ). 

4. DESCRIPTION OF CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 The drum is made of sections and supported horizontally at its 
trunnions rotating in housed-bearings. The part of the drum is sub- 
merged in a steel vat containing sludge and is rotated through worm 
gear drive or chain and sprocket drive which in turn is driven by electric 
motor. Internal piping running lengthwise is connected under each 
sector and placed against a stationary valve, and end of which is con- 
nected to the housed bearings and the other to vacuum through receiver 
and moisture trap. 

5. OPERATION 

5.1 Valves and piping are so arranged as to apply a vacuum on the 
inner side of the filter medium. 

5.2 As the drum rotates, each sector comes under vacuum and sucks the 
slurry which passes through the filter medium placed over the drum. 
The cake formed on the drum surface may be discharged either by a 
scraper, string or belt which is part of filter medium. An oscillating 

*Sppcification for structural steel ( ordinary quality ) ( second revision ). 
fCode of practice for lining of vessels and equipment for chemical processes: Part 1 
Rubber lining. 

^Specification for stainless steel plate sheet and strip. 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

agitator forming the part of the filter is provided to keep the slurry in 
suspension. A vacuum of 500 mm to 650 mercury is generally applied. 
The drum normally turns at a peripheral speed of 7 to 40 rev per hour 
( maximum ). A typical illustration of a vacuum filtration equipment 
is shown in Fig. 2. 

5.3 The filter run may not exceed 30 hours per week in small plant to 
allow time for conditioning, clean up and delays. At larger plants, it 
may work for 20 hours per day. 

5.4 The moisture of filtered cake vaiies normally from 80 percent in case 
of raw r activated sludge to 70 percent for digested primary sludges. 

5.5 Filters shall be operated to produce a cake of 60 lo 70 percent 
moisture if it is to be heat dried or incinerated. 

5.6 At the end of each filter run, the filter fabric is cleaned to remove 
sticking sludge. A jet of water is used to clean the filter medium. 

5.7 The filters are usually located in a separate room or building with 
adequate light and ventilation. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.1 ) 

LEAF TEST 

A-0. The main objective of the leaf test is to evaluate the effect of 
different fabrics, fabric forms and drying times on filter yield. Varying 
dozes and types of chemicals should also be tested to establish chemical 
conditioning requirements. 

A-l. The leaf consists of a metal disc of about SO cm 2 area on which the 
filter medium is tightly fixed. The leaf filter is submerged in a sludge 
container of known solid contents. A chemical is added to the sludge in 
measured quantity and the sludge is kept stirred. 

A-2. The basic steps in performing a filter leaf test are as follows and 
should be repeated number of times to optimize the performance of each 
media tested: 

a) Condition the sludge in 9 to 25'0 litres containers. 

b) Submerge the filter leaf into the sludge slurry and operate the 
vacuum pump for a varying time with varying vacuum. 

c) Gently remove the filter leaf from the sludge slurry to allow the 
cake to dry for a fixed drying time. 



CONDITIONING 

AGENT 



CONTROL 
VALVE -7 



DIGESTED 

SLUDGE 



L 



MOISTURE 
T^AP 



I 



FILTRATE 




FILTRATE 
RECEIVER 



FILTRATE 



tM 



FILTRATE 
PUMP 



BAROMETRIC VACUUM 
SEAL PIT PUMP 



Fig. 2 Typical Installation of A Vacuum Filtration Equipment 



on 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

d) Remove the cake from the filter leaf and measure the weight and 
moisture content of the cake. Note the cake thickness and separ- 
ability from the media. 

e) Measure the filtrate suspended solid and filtrate volume. 

A-2.1 The filter yield is then calculated using the following equation: 

L = Dry sludge weight ( g ) X number of filtration cycles/hours x 
area of test filter in square centimetres 

where L is filter yield in g/cm 2 /h. 

Note — A suitable scale up factor should be applied to the result obtained from 
the above test. 

A-3. A schematic diagram of the apparatus for leaf test is given in 
Fig. 3. 

AIR BLEED 

VALVE 



LEAF 

FILTER 




VACUUM 
PUMP 




t 






SLUDGE 
CONTAINER 



FILTERING 
FLASK 



Fig. 3 Apparatus for Leaf Test 



IS : 10037 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri L. M. Choudhary Haryana State Board for Prevention and Control of 

Water Pollution, Chandigarh 

Shri M. L. Prabhakar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Y. Madan The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. C. Mankad Geo-Miller & Co Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri D. K. Choudhtjry ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Naik Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Kenkre ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Neogi Institution of Public Health Engineers India, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. M. Rahul ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. N. Pastakia Pennwalt India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. P. Thajtoamuthu ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. P. Sharma M. P. State Prevention & Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Bhopal 

Dr G. K. Khare ( Alternate ) 
Prop S. Subba Rao • AH India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 

Shri A. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sundaram Kerala State Pollution Control Board, Trivandrum 

Shri. J. VekugopalaN Naih ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. M. Ttjli Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Shri K. Mohan (Alternate ) 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

FOR 

PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING EQUIPMENT 

IS : 

G279-1971 Equipment for grit removal devices 

6280-1971 Sewage screens 

7090-1973 Guidelines for rapid mixing devices 

7208-1974 Guidelines for flocculator devices 

7232-1974 Method for ImhofFcone test 

8403-1977 Code of practice for construction of clarifier-digester for treatment of 
sewage 

8413 ( Part 1 )-1977 Requirements for biological treatment equipment : Part 1 
Trickling iilters 

8413 ( Part 2 )-1982 Requirements for biological treatment equipment : Part 2 
Activated sludge process and its modification 

8419 ( Part 1 )- 1977 Requirements for filtration equipment : Part 1 Filtration media- 
sand and gravel 

9110-1979 Hand operated augers for cleaning water closet, pipes and sewers 

9222 ( Part 1 )-1979 Recommendations for handling and dozing devices for chemicals 
for water treatment : Part 1 Coagulants 

10037 ( Part 1 )-1981 Requirements for sludge dewatering equipments : Part 1 Sludge 
drying beds — sand, gravel and underdrains 

10053-1981 Requirements for equipment for Jackson candle turbidity meter and 
determination of turbidity 

10261-1982 Requirements for settling tank ( clarifier equipment ) for waste water 
treatment 

10313-1982 Requirements for settling tank ( clarifier equipment ) for water treatment 
plants 



