**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14955 (2001) : Guidelines for Hydraulic Model Studies of 
Barrages and Weirs [WRD 22: River Training and Diversion 
Works] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14955 : 2001 

^ajT cT^TT fct^R cfr ^cf -cjlfeid WcT cfr 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR HYDRAULIC MODEL STUDIES 
OF BARRAGES AND WEIRS 



ICS 93.160 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



■M.V 2001 Price Group 3 



River Training and Diversion Works Sectional Committee, WRD 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the River 
Training and Diversion Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 

For construction of new barrages/weirs or remoulding of existing barrages/weirs, it is necessary to carry out 
model studies to get a comprehensive idea regarding hydraulic conditions, layout of the barrage/weir and its 
appurtenant structures. Many aspects of a barrage/weir are finalized after detailed study of different alternatives 
on a model. A need has, therefore, been felt to lay down the recommendations for various requirements for 
model studies so that a methodical uniform approach could be followed by all concerned. 

There is no ISO Standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on indigenous manufacturers' 
data/practices prevalent in the field in India. 

The composition of the committee responsible for formulating this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, should be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14955 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR HYDRAULIC MODEL STUDIES 
OF BARRAGES AND WEIRS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers the requirements for model 
studies of barrages/weir. It includes types of model, 
selection of scale, data required for model studies 
and observations to be taken on the model and the 
parameters to be finalized from model studies. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standard IS 6966 (Part 1): 1989 
'Guidelines for hydraulic design of barrges and weirs: 
Part 1 Alluvial reaches (first revision)* contains 
provision which through reference in this text, 
constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standard. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions and those given in IS 6966 (Part 1) shall 
apply. A typical layout plan of a barrage with its 
appurtenant is shown in Fig. 1. 

3.1 Divide Wall 

A straight and long wall constructed usually at right 
angles to the barrages axis for separating undersluice 
pocket from other bays, in order to maintain deep 
channel infront of head regulator. 

3.2 Head Regulator 

A gated structure located on the upstream of the 
undersluices of the barrage for regulating the supplies 
of the canal. 

3.3 Silt Excluder 

A diaphragm structure constructed in the extreme 
undersluice bay of the barrage infront of the head 
regulator for excluding coarser sediment from entering 
into the head regulator. 

3.4 River Training Works 

The training works include guide bunds, afflux bunds 
and approach embankments, etc. River training works 
are required to check the out flanking of structures and 
to guide the river to flow axially through the barrages. 



4 MODEL 

4.1 Hydraulic models are mainly of two types, namely 
(a) geometrically similar, and (b) distorted or vertically 
exaggerated. In the former, all dimensions are reduced 
to the same scale whereas in the latter, the scales for 
vertical and horizontal dimensions are different. 

4.2 The models may be rigid, semi-rigid or mobile 
according to requirement of study. 

4.2.1 Rigid Models 

In these models, the sides and bed are made rigid. 

4.2.2 Semi-rigid Models 

In these models, the sides and sometimes part of the 
bed are made rigid. 

4.2.3 Mobile Models 

In these models, both the bed and the sides are erodible. 

4.3 Choice of Scale for Models 

4.3.1 Longitudinal scale is determined from consi- 
deration of river regime, discharge and space available. 

4.3.2 The depth scale should be so fixed that sufficient 
tractive force is developed for the general movement 
of bed material used in the model. The movement 
should start at the discharge corresponding to which 
bed movement occurs in the prototype. The depth of 
water at the lowest design discharge in model should 
be sufficiently large as compared to ripple height. 
Usually a depth of 8 to 12 cm is considered adequate 
at lower discharges. 

4.3.3 The longitudinal and depth scales in the end 
decide the requirement of discharge which may be a 
governing factor. Various scales adopted for some 
typical model studies of barrages is given in Table 1. 

4.3.4 The scale for sediment injection has not been 
developed so far. As such, the injection rate is found 
out by trial and error method in model itself. 

4.4 Choice of Bed Material 

Model bed material is generally kept finer than or the 
same as that of prototype, the density being almost 
the same. If the velocities in models are not enough to 
affect bed movement, lighter material such as coal 
dust, saw dust, etc, may be used and, if necessary, slope 
exaggeration may be resorted to. 



V) 






N> 




III 



CC SLOCKS WITH 
JHARRIES OVER 
INVERTED FtlTER -^ 

SLOPE •! 1 

CURTAIN WALL 



HHHI — g — 1]| ■»■■#; 




33= 



-CC BLOCKS W»TH 
JHARRIES OVER STONE 
FILLING 

rLOOSE STONE 
\ PROTECTION 



SLOPE II 



L CREST 

ROAO 8RI00E 

-PISH LAOOEft 




flnrinrmrinoj 
1 A^'tOP BARRAGE 
t-CC BLOCKS &ER STONE 
L LOOSE STONE PROBCTION " 



PLOW 




CC BLOCKS 



^...lii-lij imi iiiuiwMii iiiiiii^^ 

";!J..J " " ' II I » ■ > ■ ■ ■■■■ ■ ■ ■l f"||'M i nrt n ■ t^ l hH-HKHHHM^k-^i^^faj i I 




<8> 




PUCHEO 
SLOPE 7\ 



SLOPE 3:1 



Frc. 1 Typical Layout of a Barrage 



IS 14955 : 2001 



4.5 Selection of Models 

4.5.1 The model studies for the location of a barrage/ 
weir, orientation of its axis, waterway and required 
training works such as, guide bunds, afflux bunds and 
approach embankments, etc, are generally conducted on 
distorted models, wherever possible, geometrically 
similar models may be preferred. However the studies of 
other appurtenant works such as optimising the length 
of divide wall, width of undersluice pocket, regulation 
or operational sequences of gates, silt excluders and 
ejectors, angle of offtake of canal, etc, are conducted on 
geometrically similar full or part width model. 

4.5.2 The model studies for deciding the profile of the 
undersluice and barrage bays, length of downstream 
floors, shape of glacis, piers, energy dissipators, etc, 
are generally conducted on two dimensional geometri- 
cally similar scale models. 

4.5.3 In some cases, the model requires to be, tilted 
where consideration of correct reproduction of water 
surface slopes in the model and adequate bed move- 
ment would require a slope, scale to be different from 
the vertical exaggeration. In vertically exaggerated 
models, the natural river slope is magnified to the same 
extent as the vertical exaggeration. Thus, a scale for 
the slope in addition to those of length and depth come 
into consideration. Value of the slope exaggeration is 
generally equal to the vertical exaggeration. Tilting 
introduces complexicity in the construction and 
operation of the model and interpretation of results 
from such models would require considerable 
experience and skill. 

5 DATA REQUIRED 

5.1 General 

It should include general information in respect of 
the project. The information may be compiled in the 
form of a project report which should include the 
following: 



a) 
b) 

c) 

d) 



e) 



Purpose of the barrage/weir; 
Behaviour of the river at the proposed site 
during last 10-20 years; 
Photos depicting behaviour of the river during 
floods, if available; 

Hydraulic design calculations for the water- 
way including barrage and undersluice bays; 
and 
Proposed gate operation schedule of barrage. 



5.2 Survey Data 

The survey data of site should include the following: 

a) Index plan to a scale 1 :2 50 000 showing the 
reach under consideration with latitudes and 
longitudes. The state, district, important 
towns or villages tributaries of the river, 
catchment area, etc, may also be shown on 
the plan; 

b) Survey plan preferably with contour to a scale 
1:10 000 covering sufficient reach of the river 
to be reproduced in the model. The upstream 
reach should cover at least 2 meander lengths. 
In the downstream of the proposed site, at least 
one meander length reach will be sufficient. 
The survey plan should depict the following: 

i) Latitudes, longitudes and the north- 
south line; 

ii) Lean weather channel; 

iii) High flood water spread (indicating 
month, year and discharge); 

iv) Formation of rapids, pools, control 

sections, etc; 
v) Different channels in case of a braided 
river; 

vi) Tributaries joining the river; and 

vii) Locations of gauge — discharge sites, 
important towns and villages in the 
vicinity; 



Table 1 Typical Model Scales Adopted for Various Barrages 

(Clause 4.3.3) 



SI 


Name of Barrage 


State 


River 


Design Flood 


Scales 


Number of Bays Remarks 


No. 








(cumees) 


.-*., 




-A 








"s 




-a 














Hon 


Ver. 


Spill- 
way 


Under- 
sluice 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


(10) 


i) 


Hotnikund 


UP/Haryana 


Yamuna 


22 000 


1/150 


1/50 


10 


8 


One Fish ladder touching right side 
divide wall 


ii) 


Samal 


Orissa 


Brahmani 


24 600 


1/350 


1/70 


24 


6 


One Excluder on left undersluice bay 


iii) 


Wazirabad 


Delhi 


Yamuna 


7 079 


1/150 


1/30 


17 


6 




iv) 


Okhla 


Delhi 


Yamuna 


8 495 


1/150 


1/30 


22 


5 




v) 


Indraprastha 


Delhi 


Yamuna 


8 495 


1/150 


1/30 


22 


10 




vi) 


Naraj 


Orissa 


Kathjuri 


29 500 


1/400 


1/66 


33 


13 





IS 14955 : 2001 



viii) Shoals and submersible land including 

the extent and nature of vegetation; 
ix) Position of existing and proposed 
structures, namely, bridges, dams, weirs, 
barrages, ghats, spurs and revetments, 
etc; and 

x) Cross-section lines giving its distance 
and orientation with respect to some 
fixed point and reference line; 

c) River Cross-Sections 

The cross-sections should indicate its chain- 
ages from some reference line and extend 
up to affluxed highest flood level. The 
distance between cross-sections may be kept 
50-100 m in a reach of 3 km upstream to 
2 km downstream of the barrage site. In the 
remaining reach on the upstream, the dis- 
tance may be increased up to 500 m. Bed 
levels along cross-section should be given at 
interval of 5 to 10 m in the deep channel and 
25 to 50 m in the remaining width. The cross- 
section should show HFL and LWL. 
The cross-sections should be taken in such a 
way that all important features of the river 
channel and the flood plan such as mouth of 
an off-taking channel, their confluence, high 
grounds if any, less erodable or vertical banks, 
thick vegetation, etc, are indicated. For this 
purpose, the distance or orientation or both, 
between the consecutive sections may be 
suitably altered, but such alterations must be 
duly qualified on the survey plan; and 

d) Survey plan showing past river courses for 
as many years as possible, or, if such data 
are not available, satellite imageries of dry 
weather channel for different years should be 
supplied preferably in 1:50 000 scale. 

5.3 Hydraulic Data 

a) Gauge Discharge Curve — Daily gauge and 
discharge data for as many years as possible 
for all sites existing in the study reach be 
given. In case a site does not exist within the 
above reach, install new gauge/discharge 
sites, one at the proposed site, one at 1.5 
meander length on upstream and one at 0.5 
meander length in the downstream and gauge 
levels at various discharges at the above sites 
during the first available monsoon season 
should be noted. The cross-sections of river 
at the new gauge/discharge sites indicating 
nature of river bed and the value of Manning's 
V be supplied; 

b) Design and high flood discharges with corres- 
ponding water levels; 



c) Yearly HFL and corresponding discharge 
with dates of occurrence for the last 10 years; 

d) Maximum flood on record with date of occur- 
rence and corresponding HFL; 

e) Discharge distribution in various channels of 
the river at important stages during the year 
for which survey plan has been supplied; 

f) Proposed pond level or levels; 

g) Water surface slope; 

h) River discharge above which the off-taking 
canal/canals should be closed and all the 
barrage gates fully opened due to excessive 
sediment charge; and 

j) In case of tidal reach, information regarding 
HTL and LTL of spring and neap tide both 
during freshets and dry season. 

5.4 Sediment Data 

a) Bed Materia! — A minimum of three repre- 
sentative bed material samples 1.5 kg each, 
across a section in the study reach, one at 
either end and one in the deep channel may 
be taken at a suitable depth below the bed 
level considering scour and deposition at site 
during flood for assessing realistic value of 
Lacey's silt factor T. 

b) Suspended Load — An assessment of concen- 
tration and characteristics of suspended load 
may be given at least at 1/3 rd, 2/3rd and peak 
discharges experienced at the proposed site. 

c) Information regarding nature of banks 
whether of uniform material, stratified, rock 
out-crops kankar, etc, along with their 
location marked on the plan. Gradation curve 
of bank material wherever protection is 
required should also be given. 

5.5 Data of Structures 

a) General arrangement of drawing showing 
layout plan of the barrage/weir, head regu- 
lator and its appurtenant works; 

b) Longitudinal-section and cross-sections of the 
barrages/weir, head regulator, etc, showing 
details of all the works; 

c) Longitudinal section and representative 
cross-sections of the canal in a reach of about 
2 km from head; and 

d) Detailed drawing and hydraulic design cal- 
culations of the appurtenant works, namely: 
(a) guide bunds, (b) divide wall, (c) silt 
excluder and silt ejector, (d) head regulator 
(e) fish ladder, (f) navigation locks, and 
(g) canal. 



IS 14955 : 2001 



6 TERMS OF REFERENCE 

Exact terms of reference should be stated by the 
sponsoring authority. The major aspects of a barrage 
which will be finalized in the model after studying 

different alternatives are: 

a) Orientation and waterway of the barrage; 

b) Location of the abutments with respect to the 
river banks; 

c) Crest level and profile of spillway and under- 
sluice bays; 

d) Coefficient of discharge for various sub- 
mergence ratio; 

e) Alignment and length of the divide wall both 
upstream and downstream; 

f) Position of canal off-take point and its off- 
taking angles; 

g) Lengths and alignments of the right and left 
guide bunds both upstream and downstream; 

h) Energy dissipation arrangements in spillway 
bays, undersluice bays and head regulators; 

j) Type, levels and lengths of the stilling basins; 

k) Silt excluder details, such as length, number 
of bays, etc; 

m) Gate operation schedule during medium and 
low floods; and 

n) Alignment of the afflux bunds, approach 
embankments, protection upstream and 
downstream of structures and river training 
works. 

7 MODEL STUDIES 

7.1 Proving of the River Model 

After constructing the river model without barrage 
according to supplied data, the model is proved before 
taking pertinent observations in the model. The 
model is taken as proved if the following observations 
of model and prototype tally: 

a) Water levels at different sections with ± 0.3 m 
of prototype values, 

b) Curvature of flow, 

c) Zone of attack by the current, 

d) Tendency of scouring and deposition, 

e) Overall flow pattern, 

f) Sediment movement, and 

g) Activation of channels at a particular 
discharge. 

7.2 Generally the following observations are taken on 



the model after reproducing the barrage/weir and 
related structures: 

a) Water levels at different locations and dis- 
charge for finding out depth of flow, water 
surface slope and afflux, etc; 

b) Velocities at different sections and in bays 
for determining discharge distribution and 
concentration of flow including at exit of 
stilling basin; 

c) Velocities along structures for assessing the 
stability; 

d) Angle of approaching flow to assess the 
obliquity; 

e) Surface and bed lines of flow for estimating 
curvature of flow; 

f) Erosion on the upstream and downstream of 
the barrage; 

g) Locating areas where sediment deposition or 
scour may take place; 

h) Differential head at the piers and divide wall; 

j) Bed configuration during and after running 
the hydrograph; 

k) Afflux in the river due to structures; 

m) Coefficient of discharge for sluicebays, weir 
bays and head regulator under free flow/ 
critical flow and sub-merged, flow conditions; 

n) Energy dissipation in hydraulic jump under 
different inflow and tailwater conditions. And 
also for different operating condition of gates; 

p) Performance of the basin under oblique 
approach flow, if any; 

q) Flushing of sediments deposited vis-a-vis gate 
operation; 

r) Negative head/pressure on spillway nappe/ 
weir glacis and at the toe of spillway near 
energy dissipation arrangement wherever 
required; 

s) Selection of proper energy dissipation arrange- 
ment; and 

t) Profile of undersluice and barrage bays. 

7.3 Limitation of Model Studies 

Model studies only help in finalization of structures. 
They have their own limitations like difficulties in 
the reproduction of silt content of water, etc. Hence 
for some of the studies, the results would give only 
qualitative idea. Therefore, the designer needs to 
incorporate the recommendations of the model studies 
only after careful consideration. 



IS 14955 : 2001 



ANNEX A 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

River Training and Diversion Works, WRD 22 



Chairman 
Shri A. K. Shangle 
Members 

Superintending Engineer 

Senior Design Engineer (B&B) {Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Talukdar 

Shri P. K. Das {Alternate) 
Chief Hydraulic Engineer 

Deputy Civil Engineer (River Training) {Alternate) 
Shri V. K. Kulkarni 

Shri M. S. Shitole {Alternate) 
Director, Flood Management, IDTE 

Director (BCD E&NE) {Alternate) 
Chief Engineer (Civil) 
Member Coordination 

Director (MP) {Alternate) 
Director (CDO> 

Deputy Director (C & FC) {Alternate) 
Director 

Research Officer {Alternate) 
Director (Central Designs) 

Joint Director (Central Designs) {Alternate) 
Shri Janki Raman Prasad Sinha 

DlRECTOR(B&FyiNP 

Assistant Design Engineer (B&F) {Alternate) 
Chief Engineer (Design) 

Senior Manager {Alternate) 
Enginer-in-Chief 
Shri V. U. Kaundanya 

Shri Abhdit Barkataki {Alternate) 
DrNayanSharma 
Shri Chander Verma 

Shri T. B, S. Rao {Alternate) 
Shri N. Partha Sarthy 

Shri S. R. Toley {Alternate) 
Head, Cwil Engg. Department 
Head Civil Engineering Department 
Chief Engineer (Project) 

Director (E^GisEEsasG)tAltemate) 
Superintending Engineer, (Barrages & Canals) CDO 

Superintending Engineer (Dams) {Alternate) 
Superintending Engineer, (MP) 

Superintending Engineer, (Gates) {Alternate) 
ShriN.N.Meera 
Shri S. K. Majumdar 
Shri G. Sethuraman 

Shri Mukesh Kumar {Alternate) 
Chief Engineer 
Shri M. K. V. Sharma 
Shri A. K. Rishi 

Director (BODHI) {Alternate) 
Shri S.S.Sethi, 
Director & Head (WRD) 



Representing 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Punjab 

Flood Control Department, Government of Assam, Guwahati 

Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata 

Central, Water & Power Research Station, Pune 

Central WaterCommission, New Delhi 

Damodar Valley Corporation, Dhanbad, Bihar 
Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna (Bihar) 

Irrigation & Waterways Directorate, Government of West Bengal, Kolkata 

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee 

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Water Resources Department, Government of Bihar, Patna 
Ministry of Railways (RDSO), Lucknow 

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 

Public Works Department, Government of TamilNadu, Chennai 
Brahamputra Board, Assam 

University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Continental Construction Co (P) Ltd, New Delhi 

Consul tinng Engineering Services (India) Ltd, New Delhi 

Delhi College of Engineering, Delhi 

Indian Institute ofTechnology, New Delhi 

Irrigation Department, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 

Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik 

Irrigation Department, Government of Jammu & Kashmir, Jammu 
ICTPvt Ltd, New Delhi 
RITES, New Delhi 

Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar 

Tehri Hydro Development Corporation, Rishikesh 

Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 

Director General (Ex-qfficio Member) 



Secretary 

Shri B. K. Sinha 

Joint Director (WRD), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 22 (174). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 
Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

f323 76 17 
\323 38 41 

f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



f 254 12 16, 254 14 42 
\ 254 25 19,254 13 15 

f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1.832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press , Darya Ganj, New Delhi-2 



