**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11068 (1984) : Criteria for Edibility of Oils and Fats 
[FAD 13: Oils and Oilseeds] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



iSj 11^^334 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

CRITERIA FOR 
EDIBILITY OF OILS AND FATS 



UDC 6i>5-l/-3: 543^92 




® C^pyfigfil 19R5 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMjUK UHAVAN, 9 nAUMiVR ^i\Ml ZAtWV. MARO 

NEW DtiLMi nwoz 

Gr 3 JanudT^ IS^SS 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CRITERIA FOR 
EDIBILITY OF OILS AND FATS 

Oils and Oilseeds Sectional Committee, CAFDG 5 

Chairman Represen t ing 

Prof M. M. CHAKRABAXtxy Oil Technologists Association of India, Kanpur 

Members 

Prof A, G. Gupta ( Alternate to 
Prof M, M. Chakrabarty ) 
Shri S. N. AaARWAii Central Organization for Oil Industry and Trade, 

Bombay 
Shri H. P. Gupxa ( Alternate ) 
AoRlCULTtTRAL MARKETING Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Nagpur 
Adviser to the Government 
OF India 

Shri R.J. Verma {Alternate) 
Shri J. A. Ashtaputke Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. N. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. P. Baliga Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Dr N. L. Murty ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. A. Bhatt Swastik Household and Industrial Products Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri C. R. Krishnamctrthy 
( Alternate ) 
Dr N. V. Brinqi Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. V. S. Mani ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry 

of Health and Family Welfare ), New Delhi 
Shrimati Debi Mukherjem ( Alternate ) 
Shki p. K. Chakrabortv National Test House, Calcutta 

Dr K. C. Guha Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Dhar { Alternate ) 
Shri P. V. Gujarathi Khadi and Village Industries Commission, 

Bombay 
Shri V. Lakshmikanthan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. N. Pandey (Alternate ) 
Shui S. p. Gupta Kusum Products Ltd, Rishra 

Shri A. R. N. Kulu ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi B. V. Kantak Godrej Soaps Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Thakub ( Alternate ) 
Dr M, K. Kundu Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats 

( Ministry of Civil Supplies ), New Delhi 
Dr G. Lakshminarayana Regional Research Laboratory (GSIR ), 

Hyderabad 
Dr A.J. Pantulu ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. M, Lal Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri T. V. Mathew Central Agmark Laboratory, Nagpur 

Shki M, R. Gbover ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Mathtjr Vanaspati Manufacturers* Association of India, 

Bombay 
Shri G. K. Sood ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Singhal Shriram Foods & Fertilizer Industries, New 

Delhi 
Shri T. N. Agqarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shei G. V. SiRUR Solvent Extractors* Association of India, Bombay 

Shri L. Krishan Kumar ( AUernat*. ) 
Dr ( Shrimati ) Kamla Sohkie Consumer Guidance Society of India, Bombay 

Dr C. Sbinivasulu Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bhubaneshwar 
Dr (Shrimati) K. Vijavalakshmi 
( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Thirxtmala Rao Oil Technological Research Institute, Anantapur 

Shri G. Azekmoddin ( Alternate) 
Shri P. R. Vishwambharan Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri K. Gopinatha Mknon 
( Alternate) 
Shri M. D. Wasnik Directorate of Oilseeds Development, Hyderabad 

Shri S. P, Jcyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mathur, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri P. S. Arora 

Senior Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 



Oils and Fats Subcommittee, CAFDG 5 : 1 

Convener 
Dr G. Lakshminabayana Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), 

Hyderabad 

Members 
Agricultural Mabketing Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Nagpur 

Adviser to the Government 
or India 

Shri T. V. Matiibw {Alternate) 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CRITERIA FOR 
EDIBILITY OF OILS AND FATS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 15 September 1984, after the draft finalized by the Oils and 
Oilseeds Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council and the Agricultural and Food Products Division 
Council . 

0.2 Most of the fats and oils in use today for edible purposes are 
traditional items that have become accepted for the purpose through 
centuries of usage. Sesame, rape, mustard and coconut oils are perhaps 
the oldest of these, followed by the Portugese introduction of the ground- 
nut and its oil in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Other local 
traditional edible oils are those of sunflower and niger, and in a smaller 
way of sal, Dhupa^ Kokiim, linseed, etc. 

0.3 In recent times, new oils have been introduced whose edibilities were 
primarily established by usage elsewhere. Examples of such materials 
are refined cottonseed oil, sunflower seed oil, soybean oil, palm oil and 
tobaccoseed oil, which were therefore accepted without question in India 
as being edible. 

0.4 Recently, however, new developments have occurred. Certain minor 
oils used in local diets have been commercialized, such as sal seed fat, 
mango kernel fat and Kokum butter. Other fats about which less is 
known are becoming available, such as the seed oils of the citrus family, 
water-melon, pompkin, tea, coflfee and the like, whose edibility has not 
been traditionally established. Moreover, even fats that are known 
to have been consumed by human beings cannot, on that score, be 
automatically assumed to be beneficial to health on unrestricted 
consumption. 

0.5 A certain protocol of testing is today in vogue to determine the 
edibility and toxicity or otherwise to human beings of any ingested 
product. Ideally this involves, stepwise examination of analytical 
characteristics, biological testing on rats, biological testing on two other 
animal species including a non-human primate, and final testing on 
human volunteers. Certain steps may be omitted, for example, if the fat 
is already in edible use, and rat tests are normaL 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

0.6 This standard outlines procedures for the stepwise examination of a 
fat or oil that is under consideration for edible use. The various steps and 
their significance is first outlined in general terms. This is followed by 
the broad experimental directions relating to each step. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard outlines the stepwise criteria to be followed to determine 
the edibility or otherwise of an oil or fat. 

2. STEPS INVOLVED 

2.1 History of Use — Collect information from local practices or from 
historical records regarding usage of the oil or fat, either for internal 
consumption as a medicinal or edible material, for external application or 
for non-human usage. These data will offer some clues to the possible 
properties of the fat in its unrefined form. However, once the fat has 
been refined, these properties may not still apply. An inedible fat may 
become edible on refining. 

2.2 Analytical Examination — Determine thoroughly the physical, 
chemical and spectral analytical characteristics of the fat, the nature of 
its component fatly acids and any unusual components of its unsaponi- 
fiable matter. Any unusual features will call for specific attention in 
animal testing. 

2.3 Testing on Rats — The first biological testing is usually done on 
albino rats on diets containing 10 percent fats to determine chronic 
toxicity by way of fat digestibility, feed utilization, growth performance 
and indications of chronic toxicity. If the testing is continued for three 
generations, reproductive performance on the fat containing diet can also 
be estimated. For acute toxicity, the fat as injected, and the organs 
examined histopathologically. 

2.4 Testing on Other Animals — It is desirable to also test the fat for 
edibility on two other animal species, one of which is a primate that 
resembles man. The type of testing is similar to that in rats. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)* 

4 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

2.5 Human Testing — Fats found edible shall finally be tested by 
feeding to human volunteers, and the mass gain, fat digestibility and 
effect on serum lipids examined. 

2.6 Determining Edibility — Putting together all the evidence from 

the experimental data, a statement should be possible regarding the 
edibility of the fat, and any restrictions indicated in respect of its 
unrestrained usage for human consumption. 

3. ANALYTICAL EXAMINATION 

3.1 Analytical Characteristics 

3.1.1 Using standard method, determine the following usual analytical 
characteristics: 

a) Melting point (if solid), 

b) Refractive index, 

c) Iodine value, 

d) Saponification value, 

e) Acid value, and 

f) Content of unsaponifiable matter. 

Note — Any oil or fat with a melting point of 45'*G and above is not meant for 
direct edible consumption. 

3.1.2 Examine the ultraviol^ absorption spectrum ( this will indicate 
any conjugated material ) and the infrared absorption spectrum ( for any 
unusual features ). 

3.1*3 Carry out the specific quantitative or qualitative tests for the 
presence of the following: 

a) Hydroxy acid, 

b) Epoxy acid, 

c) Cyclopropene fatty acids, and 

d) Any other toxic material, such as alkaloids, etc, 

3.1.4 Determine the percentage of glycerol present. 

3.2 Fatty Acid Gomposition — Examine the fatty acid compoheftti 
present in the form of their methyl esters, qualitatively by thin-layer 



IS: 11068 -1984 

chromatography (TLG ) and quantitatively by gas-liquid chromatography 
( GLC ) or high pressure liquid chromatography. Where GLC is used, 
it is advisable to determine the composition both on short silicon columns 
and on long polyester columns. Where unusual fatty acids are present, 
the chromatographic methods should be suitably adopted. Separation of 
the total fat by silver ion-TLC against a knov^n fat of similar unsatura- 
tion will also serve to indicate any unusual components. 

3.3 Examination of Unsaponiiiable Matter — Many classes of 
compounds like sterols, hydrocarbons, pigments, alcohols, alkaloids, etc, 
are present, each class being itself a complex mixture. Resolution by TLC 
of the unsaponifiable matter of the test fat, alongside that from a familiar 
material like groundnut oil, will point to any unusual constituents. Use 
of three solvent systems for separate resolutions will also be helpful. Such 
solvent systems using TLG on silica gel G are as follows: 

a) Benzene alone, 

b) Benzene : ethyl acetate ( 95 : 5 ), and 

c) Chloroform : trichloroethyiene ( 30 : 70 ). 

3.4 Interpretation — The tests so far will show whether the fat is 
unlikely to be edible, for example, if the contents of hydroxy, epoxy or 
cyclopropene acids, or of unsaponifiable matter, are high, or whether 
further testing is justified. It will also indicate any special emphasis in 
the conduct of the animal work. Thus a saturated fat will call for specific 
attention in animal studies to digestibility, skin condition, tail necroses 
and the nature of serum and liver lipids. A fat containing cyclopropene 
fatty acids may be expected to lead to accumulation of stearic 
acid in adipose tissues. A high conteat of unsaponifiable matter, or 
unusual constituents, may call for special feeding studies with isolated 
unsaponifiable matter. Previous literature on the specific effects of 
certain constituents must be examined to further guide the course of 
animal studies, 

4. TESTING ON RATS 

4.1 Acute Toxicity — Typically, 6 male and 6 female rats are injected 
iniraperitoneally with 05 ml of the test oil daily for 7 days, with 
groundnut oil as a control. All the animals are sacrificed and all 
the organs ( liver, kidneys, testes and heart ) are examined histopathologic 
cally for any abnormalities in comparison with the controls. 

4.2 Long-Term Rat Studies 

4,2,1 Methodolofiy — As an example, 24 male and 24 female weanling 
rats are divided into two groups with equal numbers of either sex. Each 



IS: 11068- 1984 

is fed for 22 weeks on a diet adequate in all respects containing 10 percent 
of the test oil in one group and 10 percent of groundnut oil in the 
other. The animals within groups are mated, and the feeding continued 
for three generations on the weaned animals. 

4.2.2 Growth Performance and Feed Efficiency Ratio — For each generations, 
the gain in body mass for weeks is observed and the feed efficiency ratio 
is calculated separately for males and females. 

4.2.3 Fat Digestibility — Faeces are carefully collected ( adhering food 
must be removed) separately from each animal on say, the 10th day on 
the diet. The faeces are dried, ground and saponified with alcoholic 
potash, after which the soaps are acidified with dilute sulphuric acid, and 
the fatty matter isolated with light petroleum. A control group of rats 
on the same diets without added oil, but with the same mass of 
added sucrose (to make the diets isonitrogenous ), serve as controls for 
fat excretion. The difference shows the extra fat excreted coming from 
the fat fed, from which the percentage digestibility is calculated for both 
the test oil and groundnut oil. 

4.2.4 Nature of Rat Lipids — At the end of the first generation feeding, 
the skin condition is noted and the content of serum lipids and of liver 
lipids is measured. Additionally, if possible, the following determinations 
are also undertaken: 

a) Serum and liver cholesterol and triglyceride levels; 

b) Determination of low-density lipoprotein ( LDL ) and high- 

density lipoprotein ( HDL ) spectra by serum ultracentrifuga- 
tion, and of very low density lipoprotein ( VLDL ) by agarose 
gel electrophoresis; 

c) Content of vitamin A in the liver; and 

d) Fatty acid composition of serum lipids [ with estimation of the 
ratio between 20 : 3 {n-9) and 20 : 4 ( n-6 ) fatty acids ], adipose 
tissue lipids and heart muscle lipids. 

4.2.4«1 The animals fed groundnut oil serve as controls. 

4.2.5 Reproductive Performance — Records are kept for the three genera- 
tions of animals and the following are calculated: 

a) The percentage of females who have conceived; 

b) The mean number of days taken from IFM to delivery; 

c) The average litter size and average birth mass; and 

d) The average weanling mass and percent preweanling mortality. 

7 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

4.2.5.1 The animals fed groudnut oil serve as controls. 

4.2.6 Chronic Toxicity — Key organs of the body (liver, kidneys, testes 
and heart muscle ) are examined histopathoiogicaily for any abnormalities 
in comparison with the groundnut oil fed animals. 

5. TESTING ON OTHER ANIMALS ^ 

5.1 Choice of Animals — Complete toxicologica] evaluation calls for 
testing on rats and two other animal species, one of which is a non-human 
primate. Rabbits, hamsters, mice or dogs are possibilities for the first 
category and any species of monkeys would fall into the second. 

5.2 Methodology for Other Animals— Principles are the same as for 
testing on rats, but shorter periods may be used. Thus for digestibility 
trials, 5 to 7 growing male animals may be kept for 7 days on the diet, 
and the faeces collected on the 8th day; or three groups of animals may 
be kept respectively on the test diet, a groundnut oil control diet, and a 
fat-free diet (with added sucrose) for say, 15 days and the faeces 
collected for the last 5 days; or the same group of animals may be kept 
in turn on the test oil diet, a fat-free diet, and a groundnut oil diet for 
say, a week each, and the faeces collected on the last day of the 
particular feeding. Acute toxicity trials may be carried out by fat 
injection, as described for rats. 

5.3 Methodology for Monkeys — As an example, 2 groups of 8 monkeys 
( Macacca radiata ), matched for body mass, are put on diets containing 
18 percent protein and 10 percent of total fat (test oil or groundnut oil ). 
After 2 months, the peripheral blood samples are drawn and analysed 
for lipid phosphorus, total cholesterol and triglycerides, and if possible 
for fatty acid composition. To determine any possible effect on lipid 
metabolism, the levels of enzymes such as glutamic oxalacetic 
transaminase ( SGOT ) and glutamic pyruvic transaminase ( SGPT ) may 
be determined. Also, after feeding for a period of 6 to 12 months, the 
animals can be sacrificed and key organs like the heart, liver, adrenals 
and sartorius muscles examined histopathoiogicaily after suitable 
staining. 

6. TESTING ON MAN 

6.1 Choice of Subjects — Volunteers, usually young men, must be 
found who agree in writing to participation in the feeding trials, which 
are limited to digestibility studies and examination of serum lipids for 
tryglycerides, cholesterol and total fatty acid composition. If possible 
various classes of plasma lipoproteins may also be determined. 

8 



IS : 11068 - 1984 

6.2 Methodology — • As many subjects are possible, say 6 to 12, are kept 
for a period of 7 days on a diet very low in fat, at the end of which the 
faeces are collecbed for a day and analysed for the mass of fatty matter 
(metabolic fat ex9reted ). Next 10 percent of the test fat ( ingested fat ) 
is added to the diet and after another 5 days; the faecal fat excreted is 
again weighed. The percent digestibility is given by the following 
formula: 

T^. .,.,. Fat invested — ( Fat excreted — 

Digestibility, percent Metabolic Fat Excreted) 

by mass = 100 x t- — r __ ^_j? 

rat mgested 

Blood samples at the end of the fat feeding period are drawn for analysis. 
7. FINAL EVALUATION 

7.1 Assembly of Data — The results of all the animal and human 
experiments, along with those of the controls employing groundnut oil, 
are compared, and a judicious conclusion regarding the edibility of the 
fat arrived at. This may be in terms of unrestricted human usage, 
usage with certain restrictions, or undesirability for use as an edible fat. 
Where the fats are used only occasionally, or in small amounts, the 
permissible criteria could also be more tolerant than for cooking fats used 
regularly and in volume. A further mitigating circumstances in India is 
that the invisible fat present in almost every dietary constituent, notably 
cereals and pulses, constitutes 10 to 20 grams every day, as is of a highly 
unsaturated nature with about 50 percent of linoleic acid. 



IS: 11068-1984 

( Continued /Tom page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri J, A. ASHTAPUTRE Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

SiiRi P. K. Majumdar ( Alternate ) 
Assistant Diuector ( Aohi Enoo) Indian Council of Agiicuitural Research Institme, 

New Delhi 
Skp.i V. K. Eansal Central Organization for Oil Industry and Trade, 

Bombay 
Shhi H. p. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. V. Bbikgi Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. V. S. Mani ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry 

of Health and Fam-ily Welfare ), New Dellii 
Shbimati Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate) 
Shri R. D. Kawatra Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri V. Lakshmikanthan Khadi and Village Industries Commission, 

Bombay 
Shri V. K, B. Natr { Alternate ) 
Sbrj R. K. Mabphatia Indian Paint Association, Calcutta 

Shri Rabin Sarkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R* K. Mathur Vanaspati Manufacturers* Association of India, 

Bombay 
Shri G. K. Sood ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. L, Mubtv Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Dr a. D. Shitolk ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. M. Patki. Oil Technologists' Association of India, Kanpur 

Pbof V, V* R, Sctbrahmanyam 
( Alternate ) 
De J* V. Prabhakar Central Food Technological Research Institute 

(GSIR), Mysore 
Shri R, D. Shenoi Indian Confectionery Manufacturers' Association, 

New Delhi 
Da I, S, Shbnoliear Indian Council of Medical Research, N*;w Delhi 

Dr Ramesh Bhao^t ( Alternate ) 
Dr 1. A. SiDDiQui Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils and Fats 

( Ministry of Civil Supplies ), New Delhi 
Dr R. a. Khak ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Thakur Indian Soap and Toiletries Makers' Association, 

Bombay; and Godrej Soaps Ltd, Bombay 
Shri S. D. Thirumala Rao Oil Technological Research Institute, Anantapur 

Shri D. Atchyuta Ramayya ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M, D. Wasnik Directorate of Oilseeds Development, Hyderabad 

Shri S. P. Juyal ( Alternate ) 



10 



