**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10463-2 (1985) : Glossary of terms for bulk handling 
equipment^ Part 2: Stacking loading and reclaiming 
equipment [MED 7: Material Handling Systems and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 001 4 : 621869 1$ ; 10463 ( Puft 2> - 1 985 

(Reaffirmed 2004) | 



1— J 
CM 

s 

o 

Q 




Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
FOR BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT 

PART 2 STACKING, LOADING AND RECLAIMING EQUIPMENT 



•o 

C 
(D 

C» 

C 

fa 
o 



c 
'Si 

CO 



00 
O 

o 



CO 

c 

E 
a 
"5 



1, Scope — Cover the definitions of terms used in connection witii stacking, loading and reclaiming 
equipment. 

2. Terminology 

2-1 Adaptor P /ate — A iabrlcated machined plate on which pillow blocks, etc, are mounted for 
proper alignment of pulleys or wheels. 

2.2 Agitation — A phenomenon of stirring the cross-sectional surface of the pile of loose bulk 
material by means of harrow spikes or rods in order that the agitated particles of the pile fall down 
to the root of pile for reclaiming operation. 

2.3 Agitator — Set of spikes or rods fixed/attached to the face of harrow structures for agitating the 
pile surface. See also 'agitation'. 

2.4 Alignrrient — A condition in which the particular parts or components of the machine said to be 
accurately assembled in line with defined tolerances for designed operation. 

2.5 Allowable Stress — Ihe pernDisaibte operating stress determined by the application of a suitable 
safety factor to the ultimate strength. Allowable stress will be reduced for shock loads and other 
adverse operating conditions. 

2.6 >^/nA/e/7f7'e/nperafu/'e-" The surrounding normal atmospheric temperature at the location of the 
equipment. 

2.7 Anemometer — An appliance for indicating wind velocities. An anemometer mounted on top of 
the machine is used for sensing critical wind velocities and for sending audio/visual control signal for 
manual/automatic shut down of entire machine operation. 

2.8 >4/7/7u/ar/?/>7flf CAwfe— A backing plate in the form of circular rim to hold the material till the 
bucket carries the material to the area of discharge in case of cell-less bucket wheel. 

2.9 Apex of Harrow — Top point of a triangular shaped harrow. 

2.10 Arching— The bridging of material between sides of chute or hopper under certain condition 
and consequently flow of material ceases. 

2.11 Arrangement of Gantry Support Bracket— Supponing bracket vj\ti]ba\\ and socket swivelling 
arrangement for portal gantry. 

2.12 Articulated Counterbalance Boom — A cov(\\med mechanism of boom and counterweight that 
imparts generally different but balanced articulated movement of the two. 

2AZ Assembly of Head Pulley — A texm\x\a\ pulley at head with complete outfits, namely, pillow 
block, shaft, adopter plates, etc. 



Adopted 1 March 1985 



February 1686, ISI 



GrIO 



INDIAN STAN DAR DS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEWOELHI110002 



IS:10463(Part2)-1985 

2,14 Attachment ^ f< part assembled to trolley, trailer or chain with whose connection the trolley, 
trailer or chain is moved. 

2Ab Automatic Conveyor Scale — See IS : 4240-1984 'Glossary of conveyor terms and definition 
(first revision)'. 

2.16 Automatic Despatch Control^ See IS : 4240-1984. 

2A7 Automatic Digging /Uethod— An automatic conXroWed method by which programmed adjust- 
ment of slewing speed in term of Cos ^ law; programmed advanced step-distance of traverse for 
setting the slice depth; limiting of slewing angle while digging and when proceeding to the next cut 
and reversal of slewing direction; minimizing all setting up and adjustment times while keeping 
within permissible acceleration and deceleration values can be achieved. 

2.18 Automatic Lubricator— See IS : 4240-1984 {see also 2.106). 

2.19 Automatic Rail Clamp — A mechanical clamping device operated electrically or hydro- 
electricaily to grip the track rail for preventing any shifting of rail mounted equipment in non- 
operating condition. 

2.20 Automatic Sampler — See IS : 4240-1984. 

2.21 Automation — An unmanned automatic operation by which all operations can be controlled 
centrally, by elimination of human error, damage and mistake achieving maximum efficiency by using 
electric devices, etc. 

2.22 Backstop — A mechanical device to prevent reversal of loaded belt on stack or conveyor or 
tripper under action of gravity when forward travel is interrupted. 

2.23 Baffle — A device placed across the belt at head end of boom conveyor to deflect the stream 
of bulk material discharged from buckets of digging wheel towards the tail end of boom in case 
of reclaiming operation. 

This device is actuated with electromechanical actuator which lifts the baffle in case of 
stacking operation to pass out the material for stock piling. 

2.24 Baffle Plate — The cross plate used in baffle is termed as baffle plate. 

2.25 Baffle Plate LIftable—See 2.23. 

2.26 Baffle Plate Actuation — UHmg the baffle plate by electromechanical actuators. 

2.27 Balanced Drive — A drive so designed that two or more such drives on carriage or trolley 
traverse of the machine may be synchronized to pull predetermined shares of load. 

2.28 Ba/e — Metal ties under tension connected to counterweight structure and holding the canti- 
lever boom by other end to keep the boom in suspension. 

2.29 Bale Suspension — See 2.28. 

2.30 Ball Bearing Slewing Ring — A c\rcu]ar r\m iltXed wrth one or more rows of ball bearings 
with or without gear teeth along the periphery of the rim. With the virtue of construction one half 
could be mounted on fixed structure of the machine with other half attached to the part of structure 
subject to slewing motion. 

2.31 Barrel— Fitted with staggered buckets constitutes the rotary and main reclaiming element in a 
bridge type rotary blending/reclaiming equipment. 

2.32 Barrel Type Reclaimer — A mobWe machine comprising essentially of a long hollow barrel having 
buckets arranged on the periphery of a barret in a staggered fashion with reclaiming operation 
covering the entire width of stockpile through a cross conveyor mounted on the machine. 

2.33 Base Portion — Base construction of plate work of a cone gantry or central column. 

2 



IS:10463(Part2)-1985 

2,3A Bed B fending — NuxDber of different raw materials of varying quality can be homogenized 
into one raw material with required characteristics for the process. 

2-35 Benching Operation— In this operation reclaiming of material takes place along the pile length 
with constant slice height. 

2.36 Bifurcated Chute — A chute separatmg into two branches and with deflector plate or flopper 
deliver the material to either or both the branches. Thus it can be used to bypass the material and 
also used to transfer the material on either or both the boom conveyors of stacker machine to make 
the stock pile. 

2.37 B fending Efficiency ^ The ratio of mean standard deviation of material properties of input 
flow to the pile and mean standard deviation of material properties of output material properties of 
output material flow from the pile in a bed blending system. It shall be given as a ratio. 

2.3S Bfocfc Operation — \n th\s operation reclaimation is conducted across the pile cross-sectfon 
with variable sloving speed of boom and by preset advancing (advanced steps) and reversing the 
machine. The entire cross-section of pile Is thus cut in preset numbers of layers by boom 
luffing. 

2.39 Bogie — The box construction of plate work to hold one or more track traversing wheels In 
position and also supporting the carriage and main structure of the machine. 

2.40 Bogie Assembly— Bogie fitted with traverse wheels and necessary attachments. 

2.41 Bogie for Portal— The bogie supporting the portal of stacker bridgefor radial blending machine. 

2.42 i5o/5fer-- A pad or support plate incorporating pivot or hinge features for tail end anchorage 
of stacker or boom conveyor to permit vertical and/or horizontal rotation/movement for anchored 
unit. 

2.43 5oo/n — A cantilevered or overhanging structure that supports or contains the component 
parts of conveyor. It may be fixed, hinged or pivoted at tail end on the machine structure. In case 
of boom type reclaimer bucket wheels with its drive assembly is mounted on free end or head 
end of such cantilevered structure and Is capable of luffing and slewing. 

2.44 Boom Cantilever — The overhanging portion of boom beyond the hinges or pivot point. 

2.45 Boom Centres — The horizontal distance between the centre of machine or turntable and 
digging wheel and may also be referred to as boom radius. 

2.46 Boom Conveyor — A conveyor for stockpiling or reclaiming operation mounted on boom is 
termed as boom conveyor. 

2.47 Boom Conveyor Drive — Boom conveyor drive Is generally fixed at tail end or in some cases at 
intermediate location at return belt side. Drive is through electric motor, reduction unit coupling, 
brake, etc. 

2.48 Boom Head End —The farthest terminal point of the boom from the machine centre. 

2.49 Boom Hinge ■— A type of support of the boom at tail end to permit the boom for luffing action. 

2.50 fioo/w /?a(//i/5 — The radius generated from the centre of the machine to the tip of discharge 
pulley or centre of bucket wheel is referred to as the slewing boom radius which may not necessarily 
be the same as the boom length. 

2.51 Boom Sfewing Type Rec fa imer — The rec\a\rr\er machine with slewing boom at the head end 
of which is mounted the digging wheel for reclaiming operation. 

2.52 Boom Structure — A box or latticed construction for the purpose of a boom. 

2.53 fioo/n 7"a/7£A?(/ — The terminal point of boom resting near or at the centre of the machine or 
furntable, 



IS: 10463 ( Part 2)> 1985 

2.54 Bracing— Diagonal or horizontal member to stabilize the vertical or horizontal running member 
of the structure is termed as bracing. 

2.55 Brake Drum Coupling — A coupling with drum flange to suit the brake shoe grip, 

2.56 Braking Time -—Time required in course of deceleration to completely stop the unit on which 
the brake is applied. 

2.57 Bridge — The adequately designed structures in the form of box or latticed frame spanning 
across the stockpile with both ends supported on traversing carriage or trucks or with one end 
supported on traversing truck and other on fixed central column with slewing ring assembly. On 
such structure are mounted the reclaiming elements, namely, bucket wheel carriage with harrow 
structure or chain scraper with harrow structures and harrow wagons all to reclaim the materials in 
transverse direction of the stockpile. 

2.58 Bridge Conveyor — The conveyor mounted on the bridge across the stockpile to receive the 
reclaimed material and carry in a direction transverse to the length of the pile and discharge the 
material on to a fixed and ground based reclaim conveyor. 

2.59 Bridge Girders — Sides of the bridge of either plate or latticed construction, 

2.60 Bridge Supporting Section — The part of structure supporting the ends of the bridge, 

2.61 Bridge Type Bucket Wheel Reclaimer — In such reclaimer rotary bucket wheel together with or 
without rake bucket wheel either one number or two numbers are mounted on the carriage in turn 
mounted on a heavy bridge across the stockpile. Bucket wheel while rotating and traversing with 
the help of the carriage across the pile reclaim the material at the foot of pile brought down by the 
rake agitating the pile surface. 

(2.62 Bridge Type Scraper Reclaimer-^ In such machine the chain cover fitted with scraping blades 
is mounted across the span of pile to reclaim the material through scraping at bottom or foot of the 
pile. The material for scraping is brought down to the foot of pile by harrow mounted on the same 
bridge. 

2.63 Bucket— Fabricated container mounted on digging wheel, barrel/drum or scraper chain of the 
respective reclaimers, constitute a vital digging element in such reclaimers. 

2.64 fiuc/cef Z./p — The frontal edge of bucket generally made of tough material to confront the 
material while digging. 

2.65 Bucket Side — Sides of bucket in contact with material pressure while in digging operation. 

2.66 Bucket Side Pressure — In digging operation sides of the bucket coming against the materials 
of the pile undergo certain pressure which resist the slewing motion of the boom. This side pressure 
has to be overcome by the slewing drive unit, 

2.67 Bucket Support Wheel— See 2.70. 

2.68 Bucket Tooth — Tooth made of hardened material is fitted on the bucket lip to pierce or loosen 
the materials to be dug in the operation of reclaiming or excavating. 

2.69 Bucket Volume — Water level capacity of materials content in terms of volume or geometrical 
volume of bucket is referred to as bucket volume. With the ring volume added to the geometrical 
volume of bucket is termed as nominal volume of bucket. 

2.70 Bucket Wheel — A circular shaped sturdy frame having required number of buckets fitted at 
equal spacings along outer periphery, constitutes a main element for digging operation. 

2.71 Bucket Wheel Drive — Bucket wheel is hydraulic or electric driven. Drive unit, consists of 
hydraulic pump motor/electric motor, reduction unit, fluid coupling, universal coupling with propeller 
§haft§, etc, 

4 



18:10463 (Part 2) -1985 

2.72 Bucket Wheel Excavator— k mobile equipment mounted generally on crawler tracks and having 
bucket wheel mounted on luffing and slewable boom for excavating hard soil or consolidated 
material. 

2 JZ Bucket Wheel Reclaimer — A mobile equipment having bucket wheel mounted on boom or 
bridge carriage bs a main element for reclaiming bulk materials from stock pile. See also 'Rail 
mounted bucket wheel bocm reclaimer' and 'Rotary bucket wheel reclaimer'. 

2 JH Bucket-Wheel Shaft — The shaft on one end of which is mounted the bucket wheel and on 
other end the drive unit and itself supported on two pillow blocks across the boom at its head end. 

2-75 Buffer — A cushion-device fitted on the front or rear end of mobile equipment to absorb the 
shock load in case of collision. 

2.76 5t///er/A?5r — This function providing sufficient reserve of blended raw materials to guarantee 
the continuous operation of the processing plant under all normal circumstances. 

2.77 Buffer Stand — A vertical stand fitted with cushion pad with spring or wood on any resilient 
material, generally erected/fixed at the end of track against which the buffer fitted on mobile 
equipment collide and set the equipment at dead rest without much jerk. 

2.78 Bypass— A phenomenon to divert the incoming material from the normal direction of the flow 
keeping the operation of the machine for which the material was brought In abeyance. 

2.79 Bypass Arrangement — Coordinated assembly to bypass the incoming material. 

2.80 Bypass Chute — Ihe chute by means of which the incoming material is diverted or bypassed to 
desired direction. 

2.81 Cabin Adjustment Actuator — An e\ecXro-mechaf\\ca\ device or hydraulic device which adjust 
the cabin position always in horizontal position, irrespective of the boom position while luffing. 

2.S2 Cabin Controls — Means of operating the reclaimer, stacker or machine alike from a cabin 
mounted on the machine at most servelient point. 

2.83 Ca/?//? Sfaib/V/zaf/on — The method by which the operator's cabin mounted on boom is kept 
stabilized in horizontal plans irrespective of position in luffing operation. 

2.84 Cable — Power supply to the mobile machine is usually effected via a cable reel with a training 
cable. 

2.85 Cable Reel Drum — Cable reel drum is used to take the power supply or control cables by being 
wound or unwound on it, for feeding power and control supply to the mobile machine/equipment. 

2.86 C5jb/e W/nc/er — A drum on which the multi-core cable is coiled. It may be arranged with 
fixed or swivel mounting. The current is transferred to the cable through slip ring. 

2.87 Car Loader — Portable or hinged type of conveyor for loading bulk materials into box cars. 

2,8B Carriage — A sturdy fabricated frame intended to support all equipment such as slewing 
structures, boom, etc. In case of bridge type bucket wheel reclaimer, it supports the digging wheel, 
rake, etc, and is driven at preset traverse speed. 

2.89 CC/? D/yVe — The driving unit for control cable reel to wind and unwind the cable at preset 
speed. 

2,B0 Cell' less Type Bucket Wheel— \n such bucket vjheeWhe buckets are mounted on the outer 
ring of the wheel body. The buckets have open bottom towards the ring cavity and covered by 
annular ring chute or back plate attached circumferentialiy up to the discharge point of the material 
from bucket wheel. 

2 91 Cell Type Bucket Wheel — The bucket wheel in which cell-shaped buckets extending right to the 
centre of the wheel are mounted. In such bucket wheel height available is pot sufficient to transfer 
the material sideways on to the bpgm cpnyeyor. 



IS:10463(Pdrt2)-1985 

2.92 Central Column — The stationary circular tower of plate construction at the centre of circular/ 
radial track of radial blending system. One end of stacker and reclaimer bridges are mounted on 
the tower and also the feed conveyor's discharge end mounted on top of this column. 

2.93 Central Hopper — A hopper along the periphery of central column to receive the reclaimed 
material by scraper conveyor and discharging the same onto underground reclaim conveyor. 

2.94 Centralized Lubrication — A method of lubrication where the lubricant of grease barrel, pump, 
etc, are placed at convenient point of the machine and lubrication is done for all the adjoining and 
even farthest points from single such source of lubrication. 

2.95 Chevron — A pattern of making homogeneous and thin layered preblending pile generally of 
triangular cross-section. 

2.96 Chevron Pile — The stockpile where the fine and even grain size bulk material is stacked in 
numbers of individual layers along the pile length in the form of triangular pile. 

2.97 Chevron Stacking — The method of stacking where the material is dumped in large layers with a 
stacker travelling along the pile. The stacker, with the boom in a low position and the discharge 
point above the middle of pile travels to and fro on the runway between two defined limits. For 
every next higher pile the boom is raised to designed height and pile is made by travelling the 
stacker along the pile, 

2.98 Chute — A fabricated through encloser through which bulk materials are guided and lowered 
by gravity, 

2.99 Chute Through Turntable — The chute which is mounted on turntable, passes through central 
opening of slewing bearing and extends downard up to impact section or impact carriage. This 
receives the reclaimed materials from tail discharge of boom belt and transfers the same onto ward 
belt resting on impact carriage. 

2.100 Circular P re-Blending ~ A systerx} where raw materials of different quality are stockpiled and 
reclaimed radially for process plant. 

2.101 Circular Rail Track — The track of rail laid with reference to fixed centre and radius to form a 
circle. Such track is used for making circular stockpile by radial stacker and pile being reclaimed 
by radial reclaimer, 

2A0Z Circular Stockpile — A stock pile made along a radial track or in a circular form by stacker 
travelling along a radial track or by a boom stacker rotating about a central column, 

2.103 Circular Roller Ring — A c\rcu\ar ring fitted with set of rollers and mounted on tha central 
column, permits the rotational movement for stacker unit in radial blending system, 

2.104 Circumferentially Covered Back Plate — The arc shaped plate fixed to the bucket wheel up to 
the discharge point to hold the reclaimed material inside the bucket. 

2.105 Clevis— Rear or bottom end of hydraulic cylinder which is connected with the structure of the 
machine, 

2A06 Codra Lubricator— An automatic device of lubrication which is mounted on the reclaimer 
bridge and lubricates the scraper chain rollers at preset intervals passing through it, 

2.107 Co/77po5/V75r — This is the function of bed blending system consisting of the integration of 
number of raw materials with different chemical and/or physical characteristics in such weight propor- 
tions that a completed pile represents the required composition. 

2.108 Co£/A7rer Cai&//? — A cabin equipped with electrical controllers to control the entire machine, 
see also term 'Cabin control'. 

2.109 Control Cable Reel Drum — A cable reel drum which permits the cable to be laid for power 
supply to control the machine. 

2.110 Counterweight— Predetermined weight used to balangQ the cantilevered proverhaung boom 
or harrow/rack or any such structure or part of a machine, 



IS: 10463 (Part 2) -1985 

2.111 Co£//?ferwe/flr/7/ >lr/77 — The horizontal distance at which centre of counterweight acts from 
centre of machine for optimum stabilization of machine, 

2.112 Counterweight Leg — 1\\B projected structure from vertical rest of superstructure at the edge of 
which the counterweight rests. 

2.113 Counterweighted Take-up — A Xake-up mechanism or device where the adjustment is made 
automatically by the potential energy In predetermined weight. 

2.114 Coi/p/e/- — A linkage device which connects trailer or trolley to the main driven machine in 
order that the former may move along with the later. 

2.1 1 5 Coupler Link — A link designed for the connection of coupler. 

2.116 Cover Beit ( See Fig. 1 ) — A set of belt covered on the stream oi reclaimed material on steep 
hook conveyor with pressed idler roller over it to prevent rolling back of reclaimed materials. 




PRESSING 
ROLLER 



COVER BELT 



ENLARGED SECTION XX 
FIG. 1 COVER BELT ( Illustration only ) 

2.117 Crawler— A set of sturdy roller chain track to support and propel the boom type reclaimer or 
exclaimeror excavator machine, 

2.118 Crawler Assembly — A crawler track with complete set of chain, track rollers, wheels, frames 
and drive unit. 

2.119 Crawler Chain — One oi a pair of roller chains used to support and propel the machine 
mounted on such track — the upper surface providing a track to carry the wheel of the machine and 
lower surface providing the continuous ground. 

2.120 Crawler Mounted— A machine mounted on the crawler chain. 

2.121 Crawler Mounted Bucket Wheel Reclaimer — A YQc\a\vc\er having superstructure with bucket 
wheel on its boom head end capable of slewing and luffing and mounted on crawler tracks each 
consisting of a series of shoes and links. Controlled and powered from the superstructures. 

2.122 Crawler Mounted Excavator— An excavator having a superstructure capable of slewing and 
luffing and mounted on crawler tracks each consisting of a series of shoes and links. Controlled 
and powered from the superstructure. 



IS: 10463 (Part2) -1985 

2.123 Crawler Mounted Scraper — A chain scraper having a superstructure and capable of reclaim- 
ing material by luffing and mounted on crawler track for mobility and changing direction. 

2.124 Crawler Steering Arrangement — ?BxX^ssQXx\h\y o^ crawler which permit the crawler track to 
change the direction. 

2.125 Crawler Track— The pair of roller chains to support and propel the machine with upper surface 
providing a track to carry wheels and lower surface providing continuous ground. 

2.126 Crawler Truck — The frame of track laying type to which the track rollers and idlers are 
attached. 

2.127 CRD Trolley — The trolley mounted on track wheels and attached with the main machine 
supports the control reeling drum to supply power for the main machine, such as stacker and stacker- 
cum-reclaimer. 

2.128 Cutter Speed — The speed of a sample cutter passing through the main stream of material to 
collect the sample. 

2.129 Cutting Depth — The depth of sickle shaped slice cut of material in digging operation. 

2.130 Cutting Edge — The specially designed front lip or edge of bucket confronting the material in 
digging operation. 

i.131 Cutting Force — Force to over come the cutting resistance acting normal to bucket lip and 
tangential to lip circle of bucket wheel in digging operation. This is the product of cutting resistance 
of material and total cutting length of the slice. 

2.132 Cutting Length (See Fig. 2) —Total effective length of that part of a bucket edge which 
scorps the material slice while digging. 

2.133 Cutting Power — The power required to overcome digging force for slice cut of material. 

2.134 Cutting Prof lis — The shape of slice in which material is cut by digging wheel in combination 
with its rotation and slewing action. 

2.135 Cutting Resistance— The force per unit length of cutting blade or lip in contact with the mate- 
rial, this force is constant over a wide range for each type of material. 

2.136 Cutting Speed — Tangential speed or velocity of buckets along thB lip circle in digging 
operation, 

2.137 Cutting Time — The time taken for individual slice cut of material in digging operation. 

2.138 Cutting Width — IheyNidth o\ sickle shaped slice cut of material in digging operation (as 
shown in Fig. 2), 

2.139 Cylinder Equalizer — in case of four point support carriage of stacker/reclaimer machine, the 
carriage equalization for uneveness of track rail is accomplished by two hydraulic cylinders placed 
under the pair of carriage legs on two rails with common hydraulic pump. 

2.140 Digging Wheel— See 2.70. 

2.141 D/5C feec/er— A device consisting of a rotating disc in horizontal plane and with a plough 
resting on top surface of disc divert the materials dropping on the disc from a chute of feed conveyor 
to down below on to the stacker conveyor for stockpiling in radial blending system. 

2A42 Double Boom Stacker-— A linear mohUe machine consisting of a pair of boom conveyors on 
opposite directions which make the linear stock pile on both sides along the track alternatively or 
simultaneously receiving incoming material from common yard belt conveyor. 

2.143 Down Hill— The position of boom conveyor when it is lowered below from its horizontal 
position and material is carried on the belt towards gravitation. 

2.144/rf/e7*//"e — All such time during which the machine is idling to the assigned performance in 
each operating cycle and for which due consideration is taken in design to meet the rated average 
capacity of the machine. 



IS:10463(Part2)-1985 





VIEW A 

Cutting length for a particular position of bucket is given by S9+1V, which is same as 
S sin f+wioxa sharp cornered bucket, 

where 

S(p = slice depth at angle, 9; 
w = slice width; and 
B = slice depth or advance of the bucket centre. 

Average cutting length 7m', considering all the buckets engaging the sickle and applying 
correction factor for rounded corners of bucket knives; 

1 



/m = 



<p/y 



[/TmSd -coscp) +B,c^H] 



where 



<p/y= angle in radians between bottom and top of the cut sickle. 
Km =« correction factor for rounded knife corner, 

H = slice height, and 

w == slice width. 

FIG. 2 CUTTING LENGTH AND WIDTH 

2.145 Drive Base Frame — See 2.148. 

2.146 Drive Base Plate — A fabricated and top machined base on which drive units in complete 
assembly is mounted for perfect alignment. 

2.147 Drive Bogie — A bogie whose all the wheels are connected with drive units imparting travelling 
motion. 

2.148 Driven Bogie — A bogie whose connected wheels are propelled by those of drive bogie. 

2.149 Driven Trucfc Frame — See 2.148. 

2.1 50 Drive Trucic Frame — See 2.147, 

9 



IS: 10463 (Part2)- 1985 

2.151 Drum Type Reclaimer— fKv(\oh\\e machine having cylindrical drum spanned across the pile and 
rail track with number of buckets staggered mounted along the outer periphery of drum to reclaim 
the materials, A conveyor mounted inside the drum or by the side of it receives the reclaimed 
material from buckets and carry it in the transverse direction of the pile and discharge to a ground 
based conveyor along the track. 

2.152 Dw/w/w/ S/?a/if — A hollow fabricated shaft which is placed in position prior to inserting the 
slewing drive pinion shaft in turntable for sake of alignment. 

2.153 Eccentric Disc — \r\ harrow reciprocating drive, a disc mounted out of centre on a shaft con- 
verting rotary motion to reciprocating motion, 

2.154 Eccentric Pin — The pins used to hold the buckets on bucket wheels permitting the buckets 
adjustment to maintain uniform lip circle. 

2.155 Electric Slewing Drive— A slewing drive by means of electric motor. 

2.156 Electric Mechancial Actuator — k device which gives actuating motion through the combina- 
tion of electric motor and mechanical elements. 

2AB1 End Carriage— SixucXuxBS supporting the ends of the reclaimer bridge which in term is 
supported on single or multiwheel bogie travelling on rail track. 

2A%Z End Cones — In process of making stockpile, the bulk material at ends of pile forms the shape 
of inverted semicircular cone at its natural angle of repose in which volume of material content is 
not uniform at difterent cross-section. 

2.159 End Frames — Ihe fa bricated structure holding both ends of reclaimer bridge and resting on 
end carriage or traversing truck frame. 

2.160 End Stops — The stands with cushion pads placed at the ends oi rail tracks to stop by buffer 
action the mobile machine from further movement. 

2.161 fi/t/a/zze/- — A mechanical or hydraulic device which compensates/equalizes movjements of 
forces. 

2.162 External Gear Rim — A gear cut along the outer periphery of slewing bearing to slew the boon 
in mesh with pinion with required reduction in slewing speed. 

2.163 Feeder Conveyor — A short belt conveyor mounted across the boom to transfer the reclaimed 
material on to the boom belt, receiving from bucket wheel discharge zone, in case the direction 
discharge slope from bucket wheel to boom bett is not available. 

2 A64 Festooned Cables— Means of supplying electric current to carriage traversing on bridge 
girder for runways of limited length on straight tracks, through the medium of flexible cables running 
parallel with the track. The flexible cable is suspended from a light auxiliary track or taut wire and 
the festoorring is taken up as the carriage travels away from the fixed end of the cable. 

2.165 First-in First-Out — \Nhen reclaiming of the pile is started from the edge that has been at the 
beginning of stock piling. 

2.166 First-in Last-Out — VJhen the reclaiming of the pile is started from the edge that has been at 
the end of stock piling. 

2.167 f/a/75rerf W/?ee/— A travelling wheel with single or double flange(s) on outer periphery to 
act as guide on the rail track. 

2.168 Flat Top Harrow — A harrow having its top structure flattened in order to approach the entire 
top area of radial stockpile while agitating the cross-sectional pile surface with reciprocating motion. 

2.169 Fleeting Sheave — A sheave that floats axially with the rope to provide a fair lead into a 
winch drum. 

2.170 Flexible Coupling — A mechanical device that connects two shafts to transmit torque without 
slip accommodating misalignment between axially oriented driven machine members, 

10 



18:10463 (Part 2) -1985 

2.171 Flight — Plane or shaped plates in the form of blades attached at equal spacings with conveyor 
chain to push the materials. 

2.172 Flight Attachment — The elements assembled to the flights and are used to connect them to 
the conveyor chain(s). 

2.173 f //fir//? CoA?veyor— A conveyor comprising one or more endless propelling chain(s) to which 
flight are attached to push or drag the materials. 

2.174 Flop Gate — A hinged or pivoted fabricated plate operated manually or with remote control to 
direct the material flow in selective direction generally in case of bifurcated chute. 

2.175 Forward Speed 

i) A travelling motion of truck/carriage in forward direction of controlled speed to reclatm 
the stockpile at rated capacity of reclaimer. 

ii) A travelling speed of stacker truck in forward direction fixed in relation with the tripper/ 
triller belt speed in the same direction in order to stock the uniform volume of material on 
the pile along the pile length. 

2.176 Four Poir)t Support — Consists of four independent supports not inter-equalized between each 
other although each support independently could consist of one, two or more equalized wheels. 

2.177 Gantry Cone — A plate fabricated structured in the shape of a cone used as a superstructure 
for boom type bucket wheel reclaimer. 

2.178 Gear Casing — An encloser around a gear train to protect from dust ingress and retain 
lubricants. 

2.179 Gear Gyarc/— A covering fully or partly for the safety purpose. 

2.180 Grade Lime — The base line from which the elevation of various points of machine structures 
are referred for measurement. 

2.181 Gradient — The rate of incline or decline in terms of degree in the rail track on which stacker 
or reclaimer, etc, travels. 

2-182 Grizzly— A device made up of bar mesh placed below discharge point for coarse screening or 
scalping of bulk material. 

2.183 Groy/?c/Co/?^acfy4Aea — Area of crawler track in contact with the ground which depends on 
load, penetration, ground material, etc. 

2.184 Ground Load — Load out of dead weight of machine structures or dynamic force of its opsra- 
tion being transferred onto the foundation through anchorage. 

2.185 Ground Pressure — The weight or load of a machine per unit area of ground contact. 

2.186 Guide Angle — A device made up of angle section or fabricated channel shape and hung from 
reclaimer bridge supports and also guide the chain roNers of scraper chain conveyor. 

2.187 Hand Winch — A yNorm wheel type winch operated manually for harrow hoisting. 

2.188 Harrow— A set of fabricated frame projected below the reclaimer bridge to hold guide angle 
or channel track through which scraper conveyor chain moves in the set direction. 

2.189 Harrow — A structural frame work suitably sized/shaped for given pile dimensions and fitted 
with steel spikes, is used for agitating the transverse face of pile with traverse or reciprocatmg 
motion for all bridge type reclaimer. 

2.190 Harrow Base — The bottom structural part of harrow which i^ connected with reclaimer bridge 
vvith hinged connection, 

11 



IS : 10463 (Part 2) < 1985 

2.191 Harrow Frame — The structure which links the harrow with travelling carriage on reclaimer 
bridge with hinged connection. 

2.192 Harrow Reciprocation — Harrow mounted at the side of reclaimer bridge on guide shaft with 
roller achieves reciprocating motion across the pile face through reciprocating drive unit. 

2.193 Harrow Spilces — See 2A95. 

2.194 Harrow Structure — Jhe fabricated body of harrow on which spikes are fitted. 

2.195 Harrow Teeth — Set of sized steel rods or bars fitted at the face of harrow structure project- 
ing downwards to agitate the pile surface. 

2A96 Harrow Travel— Harro\N mounted on travelling carriage (harrow wagon) <gets travelling 
motion across the pile face. 

2A97 Harrow Travel Speed — The travelling speed of the carriage at which harrow moves across 
the pile. 

2.198 //arAovi/ Wa^ro/? — A travelling carriage on which a pair of harrow is mounted through frame 
structure and imparts motion to the harrow by its travelling to and fro over the reclaimer bridge. 
Also supports the pylon through which rope winch mechanism is operated for harrow hoisting. 

2.199 Head Disciiarge— Discharge of material taking place at head end (pulley) from boom 
conveyor. 

2.200 //ea£/£A7c/ — The farthest end of the cantilevered boom structure at which conveyor pulley, 
bucket wheel, drive unit of bucket wheels, etc, are mounted. 

2.201 /yeac//?oo/77 — The vertical distance needed to make possible a workable arrangement of a 
specified piece of equipment or portion thereof on machinery floor. 

2.202 Head Sprocket — Any sprocket mounted on driving shaft for scraper chain conveyor, 

2.203 Heiglit of Pile — The vertical distance of pile top from bed or ground level on which pile is 
stacked. 

2.204 Hinged Boom — When the tail end of the boom is supported on the pivoted or hinged bracket. 
On the turntable or machine body. 

2.205 Hinged Joint Type Chain — A chain made up of links with a hinge type joint. 

2.206 Hinged Support — \Nhen the cantilevered structure such as boom, harrow, etc, are supported on 
one end with the bracket with pin connection. 

2.207 Hoist— Pneumatic, hydraulic or rope winch type luffing arrangement for boom or harrow, etc. 

2.208 Hoist Device — Wire rope winch mechanism, hydraulic cylinder, etc, giving hoisting motion to 
boom or harrow. 

2.209 Hoisting — The motion of lifting or lowering of boom, stacker conveyor or harrow in vertical 
plane by means of hydraulic cylinder or rope winch mechanism. 

2.210 Homogenizing — In preblending system pile surface is stirred with harrow spikes then reclaim- 
ed by scraper conveyor or bucket wheel consequently the material of different quality get mixed 
which is termed as homogenizing. 

2.211 Hopper — A short of container with wide top and narrowed bottom to receive material of 
different quality get mixed which is termed as homogenizing. 

2.212 Hopper Car — A mobile equipment consisting of a hopper body mounted on carriage receives 
reclaimed bulk material from pay loader, shovel or boom conveyor ^ncj load§ on to yard belt placed 
under its carriage, 



IS:10463(Part2)- 1985 

2.213 Hurricane Anchor — Used for anchoring a mobile machineto tlie ground at a predetermined 
location by means of either guy ropes or mechanical devices in the eventuality of critical high velocity 
winds. 

2.214 Hydraulic Budget Wheel Drive — \Nhere the bucket wheel is driven through hydraulic motor, 
pump, etc. 

2.215 Hydraulic Cylinder for Cabin Stabilization — When the cabin is l<ept horizontal irrespective of 
boom position through hydraulic cylinder, 

2.216 Hydraulic Cylinder for Skirt Lifting — \Nhen the tail skirt on boom conveyor is lifted to pass 
out the reclaimed material through hydraulic cylinder. 

2.217 Hydraulic Drive ~~ A driv« through hydraulic motor and pump. 

2,2^8 Hydraulic Lifting Mechanism — The device where liquid pressure is applied for luffing the 
boom, harrow, etc, such as hydraulic cylinder. 

2.219 Hydraulic Luffing — When a cantilevered structure or boom with one end hinged or pivoted 
is rotated up and down in vertical plane by means of hydraulic cy!inder(s) is referred to as hydraulic 
luffing. 

2.220 Hydraulic Slewing Drive — Where the boom slewing operation is achieved through hydra ulic 
motor, pump, etc. 

2.221 Impact Carriage — Normally used with all reclaiming equipment and consists of a separate 
structural frame fitted with rubberized impact idlers and intended for the protection of belting (on 
long yard conveyor) against direct impact and avoiding spillage in course of such material transfer. 

2.222 Impact Section — See 2.221 . 

2.223 Inner Ring — inside ring of slewing bearing. 

2.224 Interlocking Control — A system of electrical remote control which starts and stops the various 
drives of different components of the machine in predetermined sequence. 

2.225 Intermediate Conveyor — A loop conveyor introduced in boom type reversible reclaimer to 
transfer the incoming material from yard belt on to the boom conveyor for stacking and remains 
idler in case of reclaiming when yard belt is reversed to carry the reclaimed material. 

2.226 Intermediate Drive Shaft — A drive shaft mounted on truck frame in between two wheels and 
drive the wheels through a pinion mounted on it and in mesh with gear rims fitted on driven wheels. 

2.227 Internal Gear /?//??— Slewing bearing consisting of inner rim with gear teeth along its 
periphery. 

2.228 Jack — An adjusting support with levelling feature. 

2.229 Jack Shaft — A secondary or intermediate shaft supported on independent bearings and pillow 
blocks and placed between drive shaft of carriage, etc, and the source of power. 

2.230 Jib — A structure mounted with pivoted bracket on superstructure connects the boom through 
bale suspension and held the counterweight on other end for balancing the boom. 

2.231 Jib Bracket — P'woted or hinged bracket on through which jib is mounted on superstructure, 

2.232 Jogging — The quickly repeated closure of an electric circuit to start a motor from rest for the 
purpose of accomplishing small movements of the driven machine. 

2.233 Keeper Plate —A plate used to retain the pin, sprocket, hub, etc, from shifting against lateral 
force. 

2.234 Lagging Chain Scraper — \x\ series the preceding chain conveyor which reclaims the material 
frgm pile and pushes it to the regch gf succeeding one for on-ward §craping. 

13 



18:10463 (Part 2)- 1985 

2.235 Lagging Chain Conveyor— See 2.234. 

2.236 Leading Cfiain Conveyor— See 2.234. 

2.237 Z.ea£//A?flr C/?3/a7 Scraper — In portal type reclaimer, the chain scraper which drags the material 
brought in its reach by preceding chain scraper and discharges on to the ground based conveyor at 
one side along the track. 

2.238 Length of Boom — Jota\ length of the boom measured along its axis from center line of bucket 
wheel/discharge pulley to its articulated/support at the tail end. 

2.239 Level Indicator — JKn electric or electronic device to control the pile height as well as to ensure 
a safe distance between the stacker boom and top pile in course of stock piling. 

2.240 Level Luff ing — k luffing motion during which the boom, stacker conveyor or harrow is 
maintained at a constant height during its operation. 

2.241 Liftable Sfcirt Board — The skirt board at tail end of boom conveyor subject to lifting for 
passing out reclaimed material for tail discharge. 

2.242 Lifting Power — Power required to lift the material from bottom digging zone up to the final 
discharge point by the digging wheel. 

2.243 Lifting Mechanism — 1\\b device, be it hydraulic cylinder, rope winch, etc, to effect the lifting 
of boom or harrow. 

2.244 Z.//'if//7flr 7*ac/:/e — Various elements, namely sheaves, pulley blocks, pins, thimbles, etc, that 
constitute the parts of rope winch luffing mechanism for harrow or boom hoisting. 

2.245 Lifting Work — IhB amount of work done in lifting the material from bottom digging zone up 
to the discharge point by the digging wheel- 

2.246 Lip Circle — The periphery generated by lip radius of bucket wheel. 

Z.2^1 Lip Diameter — Ihe distance between two bucket lips measuring through the cemre of 
bucket wheel. 

2.248 Lip of Bucf<et — lhe front edge of bucket used for cutting the material. 

2.249 Lip Radius — The distance of any bucket lip from centre of bucket wheel. 

2.250 Lip Speed— The tangential speed of bucket wheel along its lip circle. 

2.251 Linear Blender — The bridge type scraper reclaimer travelling on linear track for blending 
(see 2.337). 

2.252 /./near 5/eA?c//A7sr — The process in which the linear pile of several layer of different material 
composition is agitated by harrow across the triangular cross-sectional surface and reclaimed by 
scraper chain canveyor mounted on the bridge and travelling on the two rails each laid along the 
outer edges of the triangular pile. 

2.253 Linear Pile — See 2.257. 

2.254 Linear Rail Track — Rail tracks laid in straight line for stacker or reclaimer travelling on it. 

2.255 Linear Speec/ — Carriage, bogie, etc, travelling on rail track at predetermined speed is referred 
to as linear speed. 

2.256 Linear Stacker— Single or double boom stacker travelling on straight rail track used to stock- 
pile the bulk material along the track. 

2.257 i/A?earSfac/:/V7flr — Stockpiling of bulk material in triangular gross-section in a straight line 
parallel to rail track by travelling type boom stacker. 

14 



IS:10463(Part2)-1d8S 

2.258 Linear Plate — Removable plate of abrassion resistance lines on abrassion prone area of chute 
plate or back plate to protect the mother plate from wearing fast. 

2.259 Lubrication — The process of greasing the wear prone surfaces of various parts of the machine 
either by group or centralized lubrication method. 

2.260 Luff in g — Angular movement of boom, stacker conveyor or harrow in a vertical plane. 

2.261 Luffing Ang/e-^The inclined position of the stacker conveyor (boom) at which it is kept to 
stack the material. 

2.262 Luffing Co/7ve/or— Thecantilevered belt conveyor hinged at tail end and hoisted up and down 
from its horizontal position in vertical axis to stockpile the bulk material. 

2.263 Luffing Hoist— Hydraulic or rope winch device used to rotate the stacker conveyor ( boom) 
in upward or dx)wnward direction from horizontal position in vertical plane. 

2.264 ii/Wnflr /?aA7fire~ The angle between two extreme inclined position of the stacker conveyor 
with respect to its horizontal position when it is hoisted. 

2.265 {[Maintenance Speed — The speed at which the machine travels or is moved to reach parking 
place for maintenance. This speed is generally higher than the operational speed. 

2.266 Ma/?i/a//?a//C/5/77p— A mechanical device fitted with travelling bogie or truck to hold the 
track rail being operated by handwheel. 

2.267 l\/laximum Angle of Inclination ^ Permssible limit of boom conveyor inclination beyond 
which rolling back of bulk material takes place while stacking. 

2.268 Max//77iy/77 Z./P Speerf— Permissible limit of peripheral speed of bucket wheel beyond which 
the material in bucket may be thrown beyond the discharge-passage in wheel causing spillage over 
the structure. 

2.269 Maximum Number of Bucket Discharge — The permissible limit over which the bucket may 
pass over the discharge zone before the material content inside the bucket may be fully emptied. 
Such limit varies from material to material in digging operation. 

2.270 Neoprene Buffer— The buffer made of neoprene material. 

2.271 Nominal Volume of Bucket — The theoretical volume of material inside the bucket and in the 
ring space of bucket wheel. 

2.272 /Vo/?-Dr/Ve fios^/e — The bogie whose connected set of traversing wheel(s) is(are) propelled 
by the wheel(s) of drive bjogie. 

2.273 Non-Driven Axle — See 2.274. 

2.274 Non-Driven Sfiaft — The shaft of wheel fitted with non-driven bogie. 

2.275 Non-Driven Bogie — See 2.272. 

2.276 Non-Driven Truck Frame — See 2.272. 

2.277 Non-Driven Wheels— Set of traversing or travelling wheel (s) those are fitted with non-driven 
bogie. 

2.278 Non-Drive Truck Frame — See 2.272. 

2.279 Non-Operating Wind— \N\nd at high velocity during which the mobile equipment is not 
operated for safety reasons. 

2.280 Open Gear— Auxiliary gear mounted on traversing wheel shaft or on winch shaft for further 
reduction of speed already accomplished by reducer in the sequence. 

15 



lS:l0463(Part2)-1985 

2.281 Open Gear Ratio — The amount of reduction in speed by the use of a pair of open gears. 

2.282 Operating Wind Velocity — The range of wind velocity up to which the equipment is permitted 
for operational and due consideration of pressure arising out of such wind velocity is taken into 
account in design of machine structure and driving components. 

2.283 Operational Speed — Predetermined and controlled movement of carriage, bridge or bogie on 
rail track when the machine is operated to reclaim the material from pile. 

2,2M Operator's Cabin — Straitegically mounted on the equipment for equipment control from a 
centralized location to enable the operator to coordinate machine operation along with signals from 
other ground based equipment in the total system. 

2.285 Outer Ring — The circular plate work on the outer face of the bucket wheel which makes the 
room for material inside bucket till it reaches the discharge spot. 

2.286 Output Pinion — Pinion mounted on reduced output shaft for power transmission. 

2.287 Overload Release — A mechanism of electrical equipment to disconnect driven component from 
motive force in case of overload on digging wheel, harrow, scraper conveyor, etc. 

2.288 Pad {Shoe or Plate) — Ground contact part of crawler type track. 

2.289 Paddle — Constructed of steel and suitably lined blades constitutes the major rotating and 
reclaiming element on underground reclaiming equipment, 

2^90 Paddle Peeder — An underground reclaiming equipment consisting of truck carriage for its 
mobility on rail track and paddles as reclaiming element. Rotating set of paddles extract the material 
from longitudinal slot of the hopper along the track and feed the material on to the underground 
conveyor belt passing over impact section fitted with the machine underneath. 

2.291 Pass — A working trip of passage of digging wheel across the stockpile face, in case of rotary 
type bridge reclaimer. 

2.292 Pay Loader — A crawler mounted earth moving equipment consisting of a picking bucket 
and link mechanism to pick up recommended quantity of material and load it on to the hopper car, 
etc. 

2.2B3 Permissible Slewing Speed — The maximum speed of boom slewing, in relation with the 
predetermined bucket wheel lip speed up to which the material content in each sickle cut by bucket 
wheel may remain consistent in view of uniform reclaim capacity. 

2.294 Pillow Block — A bearing block or housing with flat mounting surface to accommodate and 
guide the bearing and transfer the load through anchorage. 

2.295 Pivot Bracket — A hinge support. 

2.296 Planetary Drive — A gear drive consisting of a ring gear, a set of planet gears and a sun 
gear generally used for digging wheel drive. 

2.297 Plow — See 2.2S9. 

2.298 Plow Feeder— See 2,290. 

2.299 Plummer Block — See 2,29^, 

2.300 Portal Scraper — The equipment consists of a portal as a main body spanned across the 
stockpile. Portal supports one or two chain scraper for reclaiming the pile from its surface. Both 
ends of portal are mounted on bogies travelling on rail tracks for the portal movement. 

2.301 Portai Type Scraper Reclaimer — See 2.300. 

2.302 Power Pack Hydraulic — A hydraulic package unit consisting of hydraulic motor, pump, 
container valve and other accessories for hydraulic drive. 

16 



IS:10463(Part2)-1985 



2.303 Power Pack Electrical 



2.304 Pre-B lending — A combined fuaction of stockpiling the incoming material of different composi- 
tion in layers. 

2.305 /'re-B/e/7c///7flr SK^re/T? — An arrangement of feeding and stacking operation in sequence for 
pre-blending. 

2.306 Primary Sampler— The sampling device used to analyse the incoming material of stockpile for 
pre-blending system. 

2.307 Prope//erS/75ff — A drive shaft that connects the gear box mounted on digging wheel shaft 
to prime mover mounted at a distance on boom structure in non-axial plane or at different level with 
the help of universal coupling. 

2.308 P//0A7 — A vertical structure on harrow wagon or travelling carriage on which rope winch 
assembly is mounted for harrow hoist. 

2.309 Rack and Pinion Gate — A gate ihted under reclaim hopper having gate plate operated by 
means of a rack and pinron gear set to adjust the bottom opening of hopper for controlled flow of 
material on to the reclaim conveyor- 

2.310 Radial Blending — Combined function of stockpiling the material of different composition in 
layers by radial stacker and reclaimed from the stockpile across cross-sectional surface by scraper 
reclaimer in combination with harrow or rake. 

2.311 Radial Rail Track — RaW laid along the specified t)uter periphery of circular pile with reference 
to central column on which the radial stacker or reclaimer travels far desired operation. 

2.312 Radial Stacker — Ihe machine having a boom conveyor mounted on a superstructure capable 
of slewing around a fixed central column and stockpiling the material in a circular form or triangular 
cross-section. 

2.313 Radial Stacking — The function of stockpiling the material in circular shape by radial stacker. 

2.314 Rail Centres — The extact distance between centre lines of pair of rails of a track. 

2^15 /?a// C/a/77p — A manually, electrically or electro-hydraulically operated device to clamp the 
equipment to rails during high wiad. The electrically operated rail clamps can sometimes be made 
operable by direct signals from the anemometer. 

2.31 6 Rail Cleaners — See 2.326. 

2.317 RafI Fixtures — Insert plates, holding plates, anchorage, etc, by which rail bottom is anchored 
with track foundation. 

2.318 Rail Foundation — Ballasted or fully concrete work on which rail track is laid. 

2.319 Rail Cap — The space between two rail edge in a track which is kept to cater for linear thermal 
expansion. 

2.320 Rail Misalignment — Deviations from the specified dimensions of track with respect to verti- 
cally or parallelity of the rails. 

2.321 Rail Mounted Bucket Wheel Boom Reclaimer — A reclaimer having a boom conveyor mounted 
on superstructure capable of slewing in either direction. Superstructure consisting of vertical mast 
(tower), jib and counterweight, etc, supported on under carriage of truck wheels. A bucket wheel 
mounted at head end reclaims the materials by slewing and luffing action of boom from stockpile on 
either sides of rail track. 

2.322 Rail Mounted Double Boom Stacker — A siacket similar to 2.385 but having two boom 
conveyors and capable to create stockpile on either sides of track length. 

2.323 Rati Mounted Single Boom Stacker — A stacker ha\/mQ a boom conveyor mounted on struc- 
ture in a direction perpendicular to rail track and a carriage of wheel trucks capable to create 

17 



IS: 10463 (Part 2) -1986 

triangular stockpile on one side of track length by means of boom luffing and travelling to and fro on 
the rail track. 

2,21A Rail Mounted Slewing Boom Stacker — k stacker having a boom conveyor mounted on a 
superstructure capable of slewing in either direction of rail track and mounted on a carriage of wheel 
track, creat trapezoidal pile on either sides on rail track length by means of boom luffing and 
slewing and travelling to and fro on the rail track. 

2.325 Rail Stop — A stop mounted at the ends of rail track of mobile equipment to stop the travelling 
wheels from further movement. 

2.326 /?a/7Siveep — A device attached with front and rear bogies of mobile machrne to clean the 
rail for smooth travel of wheels. 

^,327 Rail Track— Parallel rails laid at specified centre distance of gauge along the length of stock 
pile on which the mobile stacker reclaimer, etc, travel for designed operation. 

2-328 Rater ( Raka ) — See 2.1 89. 

2.329 Raking Carriage — See 2A9B, 

2.330 Raking Face — The bottom surface of a rake fitted with spikes in contact with materials 
while stirring the cross-sectional surface of the pile with traversing or reciprocating motion. 

2.331 Raking Wheels — A set of wheels under the raking carriage to travel on a rail track to provide 
motion to the rake. 

2.332 Reclaimer — A equipment capable of reclaiming materia! from stockpile by means of bucket 
wheei/scraper/drum or any other device as its main reclaiming element. 

2.333 /?ec/a/777/>?flr Co/yveyor — A belt conveyor mounted on bridge, drum, underground or ground 
based to carry reclaimed material from bucket wheel, bucket drum or scraper conveyor and discharge 
to a further location along the system. 

2.334 Reclaiming Equipment — An equipment capable of reclaiming material from storage. 

2.335 Reclaimer Hopper— An underground hopper to receive reclaimed material and guide its flow 
on to underground reclaim conveyor. 

2.336 Reclaimer Bridge — A latticed or box constructed frame spanned across the stockpile 
supporting chain scraper together with harrow or bucket wheel with harrow to reclaim the pile. 

2.337 /?ec/a/>77/>?flr Capac/Y/— The volumetric capacity of reclaiming equipment is the quantity of 
material in terms of volume a reclaiming equipment is rated to reclaim from a defined pile in an 
hourly period. 

2.338 Reduced -~ See 2.392. 

2.339 Regenerative Drive —A drive when the operation of conveyor results in power being produced 
and absorbed by prime mover. 

2.3^0 Regulating Gate — Agate fitted below the reclaim hopper or bypass hopper to vary size of 
opening in order to control the flow of material through the hopper bottom opening. 

2.341 Reversible Stacker-cum-Reclaimer — A combined stacker and reclaimer machine used in 
conjuction with a bidirectional yard conveyor permitting the reclaimed material to be conveyed 
back in the same direction from which it was initially brought for stockpiling. 

2.342 /?//7sr Space — Space available below the bottomless bucket covered by backing plate inside 
the outer ring of cell-less bucket wheel. 

2.343 Ring \/o/i//77e — Material content held by backing plate inside ring space in the ceil-less 
bucket wheel. 

18 



IS : 10463 (Part 2) -1985 

2.344 Rollers Guide — Set of rollers fitted with brackets capable to guide the movement of bogie, 
harrow or bucket wheel on bridge carriage. 

2.345 Roller Guide Bracket —An attachnnent fitted with truck harrow or carriage frame to hold or 
support the rollers for guided movement. 

2.346 /?o/?e £^i/5//ze/-— A device which offset the difference of stretches in two parallel running 
ropes employed for harrow or boom hoisting. 

2.347 Rope Pulley Support-^ A fabricated construction to mount the rope sheaves. 

2.348 /?ope 7*/pe fta/rer— A raker or harrow having spike-edges connected with tar steel ropes in 
longitudinal direction of pile surface such that with the movement of raker, the tar steel ropes wipe 
the material on the pile surface dropping the material to the root of pile for reclaiming. 

2.349 Rope Winch Mechanism — A device in which a set of wire rope passing over set of sheaves 
is connected with boom or harrow and wrapped round a grooved or plain drum. The drum is driven 
through a prime mover and reduction units and rope being wound or unwound over the drum impact 
the movement to the boom or harrow in vertical plane for hoisting operation. 

2.350 Rotary Plate Feeder — See 2.141. 

2.351 Rotary Plow Feeder — See 2.290. 

2.352 Rotary Reclaimer— A reclaimer having a large bucket wheel capable to rotate around a bridge 
spanned across the stock pile and mounted on two end carriages of truck wheels on rail tracks laid 
along the length of outer edges of pile. Bucket wheel and harrow together mounted on a traversing 
carriage on the bridge length, reclaim the pile and discharge the material on a reclaim belt conveyor 
mounted on the bridge which carry the material in transverse direction of the pile and discharge onto 
the ground based conveyor by the side of track. 

2.353 Rotating Cone — A plated construction of conicia shape constituting as the superstructure of 
digging wheel boom reclaimer capable to rotate in either directions on slewing bearing for digging 
(reclaiming) or operation. 

2.354 Rotating Chute — A chute rigidly attached with stacker boom and mounted on a carriage 
frame fitted with rollers capable to rotate along with stacker boom on a circular rail track around 
central column, such that the chute receive the materials from feed conveyor and transfer on to 
stacker conveyor for stockpiling. 

2.355 Safety Ladder — A ladder provided with safety cage to climb on high level platform of an 
equipment. 

2.356 Sampler— A device having a reciprocating cutter element for periodically collecting samples 
from main stream of material flow to analyze the chemical composition of materials incoming to or 
outgoing from a pile. 

2.357 Scraper Bridge — A plate, box or latticed construction spanned over the cross-section of 
stockpile supporting chain scraper for reclaimation. 

2.358 Scraper Reclaimer — A portal or bridge type reclaimer having chain scraper as a main reclaim.- 
ing element. 

2.359 Scraper Teeth — Set of teeth made of hardened material fixed on either side edges of scraper 
blades to loosen the materials on the root of the pile for easy scrapping. 

2.360 Screw-Cage Peclaimer — A mobile machine comprising essentially of a latticed, tubular 
structure carrying the buckets arranged in the form of a screw with reclaiming operati^ons covering 
the entire width of the stockpile through a cross conveyor mounted on the machine. 

2.361 Sectional Stacking --- The operation in which a rail mounted slewing stacker create a stock- 
pile covering the entire width of trapezoidal cross-section from one end to the other along the track 
length. 

19 



tS:1^63( F»art2)-1985 

2.362 Sem/'-Ce// Type Bucket Whee/ ^ Buckets, Withback open, are mounted on outer edge of the 
wheel and a radial guide plate on the inside of the wheel is connected to the back of the buckets. 
The inside of the wheel has a conical shape in order to convey the material on to the boom conveyor 
belt. 

2.363 Se/n/Po/'^a/ — An inclined portal with the end resting on a set of truck frames mounted on 
one rail near the base of pile and other end resting on set of truck frames mounted on an adjacent 
rail a level higher than the top of pile and does not completely encompass the traverse dimensions 
of the stockpile. 

2,ZM Semi' Portal Scraper — An equipment having chain scraper supported on semi-portal for 
reclaimation of a pile. 

2.365 Service Factor— The amount by which rating of unit is reduced to compensate for increased 
service requiiement over the rated condition. 

2.366 Ship Loader — A rail mounted travelling portal type machine having a cantilevered shuttle 
stationary conveyor for loading or trimming of vessels or ship holds. 

2.367 Shuttle Conveyor — A belt conveyor In a self contained structure capable of travelling to and 
fro in defined range of rail track mounted on wagon loader structure for loading the rake of wagons, 

2.368 Side Scraper — A chain scraper that reclaim the material from one side surface of a stockpile. 

2,36B Single Boom Stacfcer — A stacker machine having one boom conveyor capable of luffing 
(and slewing in case of slewing stacker) to create stockpile. 

2.370 Skip Width Chain — A chain having one row of links. 

2.371 Skip Hoist {/nclinedj Vertical )— An equipment with multiwheeled bucket or car operating 
up and down a definits path, through wire rope receiving and discharging bulk material on an 
inclined/vertical track carved at the top to tip and empty the skip automatically for loading or 
stacking piling. 

2.372 Skirt Board — A plate construction to form a trough guide on receiving loading zone of a 
conveyor to guide the stream of material. 

2.373 Slev^ing Angle — Amount of angular displacement of the boom { along with digging wheel ) 
in horizontal plane in either direction with respect to centre line of rail track or crawler track. 

2.374 Slewing Arrangement— Clamp or king pin and roller or geared slewing bearing design to 
permit the slewing of a boom or an entire superstructure subject to slewing. 

2.375 Slev\/ing Bearing Gear Rim — A slewing ring bearing with gear rim fitted on its external or 
internal face to get engaged with driving pinion for slewing motion of thia superstructure. 

2.376 Slev\/ing Boom — A boom supported on and suspended from a superstructure subject to 
slewing in its horizontal plane. 

2.377 Slewing Drive — Means of driving slewing arrangement such as electric motor in combination 
with reduction unit or hydraulic pump motor. 

2.378 Slewing Radius — See 2.50. 

2.379 Slewing Range — Pre-determined amount of angular displacement in horizontal plane that the 
boom ( along with digging wheel ) undertakes in either direction with respect to centre line of rail or 
crawler track. 

2.380 Slewing Ring — The circular ring fitted with rollers or antifriction bearing on which one end 
of boom, stacker portal or reclaimer bridge is mounted for slewing movement. 

2.381 Slewing Ring Bearing — A large circular ring fitted with row(s) of ball or roller bearing 
that supports the superstructure permitting slewing movement. 

20 



rS: 10463 (Part 2)- 1985 

2,382 Slewing Speed --^ViB speed at which the boom (along with digging wheel) rotates in 
horizontal plane. 

2 J83 Slewing Stacker— A stacker having a boom conveyor mounted on slewing structure capable 
of rotating in either direction of rail track ( in case of rail mounted ) or of rotating all around the 
vertical axis of the stacking structure ( in case of fixed ground mounted ) to create linear trapezoidal 
or circular conical stockpile. 

2.384 Slewing Structure — A sturdy structure accommodating boom, counter-weight, tower, luffing 
hoist, etc, capable of slewing through a pre-determined arc (in either direction) by means of a 
power drive unit driving the slewing arrangement. 

2.385 Sliding Base — A support providing controlled movement. 

2.386 Slide Gate — k type of gate in which the gate plate slides in guides to adjust the hopper 
opening for controlled flow of material. 

2.387 Slide Ring for Portal — A circular ring fitted with guide rollers mounted along the periphery 
of central column through which one endx)f portal is supported on column for its radial movement. 

2.388 Slide Ring /or Scraper — Similar to 2.357 except that the scraper bridge is mounted through 
it for radial movement. 

2.389 Slinger — A device mounted at the bottom of the discharge chute to permit high speed 
aligning of material and maximum loading in a ship, specially in case of handling relatively low 
density material like coal. 

2.390 S/ope — The inclination or angle at which the cross-sectional face of pile stay while being 
reclaimed. Also the rate of incline or decline in terms of degrees from the horizontal or percentage 
rise from horizontal for a rail track or pile bed in a yard. 

2.391 SpaA7— Length of the bridge or portal encompassing across the pile to be mounted on the 
parallel rails close to outer edges of the pile base. 

2.392 Speed Reducer '— A power transmission mechanism designed to provide either a constant or 
variable speed for the driven equipment less than that of prime mover. Normally totally enclosed 
for lubrication and prevention of entry of foreign material. 

2.393 Spring Take-up — A take-up mechanism where adjustments are made automatically by the 
potential energy of spring. 

2.394 Sproc/re? — A wheel with suitably shaped and spaced kegs or teeth on its circumference to 
engage with the link of a chain- 

2.395 Sprocket Ratio — The ratio between number of teeth of driven and driving sprockets 
respectively and indicating the change of speed existing through a chain drive. 

2.396 Stability Factor — A ratio of the stabilizing moment and the overturning moment for any given 
equipment, 

2.397 S^a6/e S/ope — The condition of cross-sectional surface of a stock pile where the materials 
stay firm even at higher slope than natural angles of repose in ease of cascating underneath by 
digging wheel. 

2.398 5fac/:er — The mobile equipment that creates the pile of bulk materials (see also 2.256 
and 2.312). 

2.399 Sfac/rerCoA?v'eyor— A belt conveyor mounted on boom capable of luffing and slewing and 
creating stockpile. 

2.400 Stacker Portal — The portal supporting the stacker conveyor for creating stockpile. 

2.401 5rac/r/V?g' — PrQces^ of stockpiling the material by linear or radial stacker [see also 2.256 
and 2.312), 

?1 



IS: 10463 (Part 2) -1985 

2.402 Stack Rate — A combined stacking and reciairriing machine comprising two separate booms -= 
one with chain and flights for reclaiming and the other a conveyor boom for stacking — all mounted 
on a comnr.on carriage supported on wheeled track running on rail track along the stockpile. 

2.403 Starting Time — Duraticn of time taken by a driven component o^ an equipm.enr to pick up 
its full running speed. 

2.404 Steep Conveyor witti Cover Belt — See 2.116. 

2.405 Stringers — The longitudinal supporting members normally of angle or channel sections for 
idlers mounting between t-he headend tail terminal supports of a conveyor. 

2A06 Superstructure — A set of sturdy structured construction consisting of veritcai tower, job, 
counterweight, etc, and supported on under carriage through rotating element (slewing bearing). 

2.407 Support for Disc Feeder— A r\r\g with roller, etc, mounted along the periphery of central 
column supporting the disc plate for its rotation in horizontal plane. 

2.408 Surge Hopper — A properly shaped container to receive surge flow of material and pass it on 
to succeeding element of an equipment. 

2.409 Suspension — The state in which the boom or harrow is held at certain angle against gravity 
by a counter balancing weight through bale ropes or strut ties. 

2.410 Smve/Z.esr —The bracket fitted with ball and socket or cup and cone through which the 
stacker portal or reclaimer bridge is mounted on truck carriage to cater for radial thrust and he^p 
maintain radial movement. 

2.411 Ta/?/e D/a/77efeA' — The diametrical dimension of the circular horizontal disc plate of table 
(disc) feeder. 

2.412 Taif Discharge— Material transfer taking place at tail pulley of boom canveyor being reversed 
when reclaiming. 

2.413 Tail Drive — Drive unit connected to the shaft of tail pulley of boom conveyor. 

2 A^^ Tail Shafts — 1\\^ shaft supporting tail pulley or sprockets of boom conveyor, reclaim 
conveyor chain scraper, 

2.415 Tail Skirt Board— Skirt board fitted at tail end of boom conveyor. 

2.416 Tail Sprockets— Sprockets mounted on tail shaft of chain scraper. 

2.417 Teeth — See 2.6S and 2.359. 

2.418 7e/e5Cop/c C/?wfe — Consists of a number of collapsable square or circular tubular members 
which are liftable or made collapsable by means of a rope hoist, commonly used for stacking equip- 
ment and shipioaders to minimize dust nuisance. 

2.419 Torque Arm Drive — A type of drive incorporating a shaft mounted gear box ( speed reduced ) 
in which the developed torque is resisted by a pivoted connecting link between the gear box and a 
fixed anchor point on structure or frame. 

2.420 7ow-^3/— Interconnecting element between a driven and a non-driven equipment such as 
between stacker/reclaimer and its trailer tripper. 

2.421 Tower — The vertical structure of box or latticed construction forming the part of super- 
structure and resting on turptabl^ supports the jib and counterweight fpr balancing cantilevere^ 
jpppm structure. 

22 



IS : 10463 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

2.422 Tow Pins — Set oi pins to hold the bar with the bracket filled on stacker/reclaimer and trailer 
frame. 

2.423 Tra/Ver (Tr/pper) — Consists of a mobile structure fitted with discharge pulley and a set of 
idlers in an inclined disposition, with a main belt of the yard conveyor reeved about the discharge 
pulley and a separate bend pulley mounted on the structure. The material on the yard conveyor is 
elevated and discharged either to a separate intermediate ( loop) trailer or directly to the boom 
conveyor for stock piling. The unit is attached to the main driven machine through interconnecting 
tow-bar or coupler to be propelled to and fro on main rail track along with the main machine. 

2.424 Trai/er {Tripper) Discfiarge Chute— A chute that transfer the material from trailer (tripper) 
onto the boom conveyor or stacker conveyor for stockpiling. 

Z.^S Transfer Car — An independently mobHe platform used for relocating stackers, reclaimers or 
the like from one pair of raHs to another pair of rails tracks to enable rails a given stacker or reclai- 
mer machine to handle more than one pile. The unit moves (travel) on any independent pair of 
rails in a direction transverse to the length of the stockpile. 

2.426 Transfer Chute — A chute mounted on transfer trolley orienting the material discharge from 
yard belt trailer onto the tail end of intermediate conveyor. 

2.427 Transfer Troliey — Structure mounted on wheeled truck frames supporting the junction of yard 
belt and intermediate ( loop) belt trailers where material is transferred from yard bely to intermediate 
conveyor belt for onward discharge onto the boom conveyor for stockpiling, 

2.428 Trapezoidal Pile — A linear pile of bulk material with wide base and flat top and whose cross- 
section is in the shape of a trapezium. 

2.429 Travelling Mechanism — A set of mechanical device equipped with pinion and rack or chain 
driven by prime mover through speed reduced imparting motion to harrow wagon or trolley for back 
and forth travel on rail track. 

2.430 Travel Wheels — See 2.432 . 

2.431 Traverse Drive Unit — A torque arm drive arrangement where one or more traversing wheel (s) 
fitted with truck frames or bogies is ( are ) connected to electric motor through shaft mounted 
speed reduced; coupling, brake, etc, for travelling motion on rail track. 

In some cases, besides speed reduced, a set of pinion and gear rims are employed to drive the 
set of traversing wheels. 

2.432 Traverse Wheels — Set of flanged or flanged-less (or flat) wheels fitted with bogies or carri- 
age to roll on rail track imparting travelling or traversing motion to carriage or bridge in predefined 
path, 

2.433 Irench — A long narrow ditch below the base floor or normal grade to lay the power supply 
cables. 

2.434 Triangular Harrow — fK harrow structure made in triangular shape to cater for triangular pile- 
surface in blending system. 

2.435 Triangular Pile — A linear or circular pile of bulk material with wide base and zero width at 
top and whose cross-section is in the shape of a triangle. 

2.436 Trimmer— k conveyor or other means to level or shape a b^ilK load in a bin; rail road car or 
§hip's hold, 

23 



IS:10463(Part2)-1985 

2.437 Trolley — k wheeled frame or carriage supporting associated components/equipment of main 
machine either self driven or propelled t>y main equipment {see also 2.187 ). 

2.438 Truck — fK set of wheeled truck frames or bogies connected in series to support the carriage 
or main structure of the equipment, 

2 AZ9 Truck Drive — Seel AZ^. 

2.440 Truck Frame — See 2.39. 

2.441 Truck Frame Assembly — See 2.40. 

2.442 Turntable — A horizontal frame subject to rotational movement with the help of slewing drive, 
such that boom or superstructure mounted on it is rotated or slewed along with in horizontal plane 
in the desired slewing range, 

2A^Z Twin Boom — A pair of boom structure equipped with conveyors mounted on a stacker at 
opposite direction (that is, at 180°) such that both the boom conveyors receiving materia! from 
trailer belt, can stackpile the material simultaneously or alternatively along the track length. 

2AI^A Twin Bucket Wheels — ^Apair of bucket wheels — whether cell type, semicell or cell-less, 
mounted on a common shaft and independently driven simultaneously reclaim the materials against 
all sides of a ship hold ensuring no fouling of material with feeder conveyor on to which pair of 
wheels drop the materials. 

2.445 Under Carriage — A sturdy box framed carriage that supports the turntable ( slewabie ) through 
slewing bearing mounted on horizontal top surface and itself resting on truck frames through four 
or three-point supports. 

2.446 t/nc/er Cama^re 5ea/7?5 — The beams of box construction connecting the series of wheeled 
truck frames and supporting under carriage through combination of fixed and equalizer legs forming 
four- or three-point supports. 

2A^7 Uni-directional Reclaiming — Stockpile being reclaimed with uni-directional movement of 
the machine. The reverse movement is meant for transposition of machine only. 

2.448 Ua//e/ /l/75r/e — The angle to the horizontal subtended by the line of intersection of two 
inclined planes or two adjacent sides of a hopper or chute. 

2.449 Variable Speed— The speed of slewabie boom, travelling harrow or rotating digging wheel 
that varies or changes infinitely or in preset number of steps within designed limit. 

2.450 Vibrating Rake {Oscillating Rake) — A taking device consisting of a tube fitted with excava- 
tor teeth and in addition with toothed traverse is mobile support at the carriage and at the top by 
hinged guide, thus capable of circular oscillating movement arising out from upward and traversing 
motion for cutting and dislodging the pile surface. 

2.451 Volumetric Capacity — Ihe rate of stacking, reclaiming or loading of bulk material in terms of 
volume per hour (mVhr) by an equipment. 

2.452 Wagon Loader— A special machine specifically meant for loading wagons. 

2.453 lVa//:i^a/ — A narrow platform with side hand railings along boom conveyor or bridge to 
provide access to various components, 

2.454 VVear//?sffiar— A replaceable bar attached to a runway that protects the main member frprn 
wear or damage, 

?4 



IS: 10463 (Part 2) -1985 

2.455 Wearing P /ate — A rep\aceabi\^ plate that is placed at point pf wear, due to discharge ot 
material, to protect the main member from wear or damage. 

2.456 Weigh idler — The conveyor idler mounted on the carriage of a belt conveyor scale. 

2.457 Weighing Device — A hydromechanical, pneumatic or electrical device that registers and/or 
control the amount of material being handled by batch or continuous weighing. Can be equipped 
with either visual indicators or automatic registering equipment of both. Can also be arranged to 
control speed to compensate for lag in processing or non-uniform material load on conveyor. 

2.458 Weigh Lorry — A travelling hopper for receiving, weighing and loading bulk materials on to 
the wagon. Remote control device for operating the bunker or bin^ates is mounted on the lorry 
chessis. 

2.459 Weight Control System — A weighing system in which the weight measurements are used to 
control the flow of material. 

2A60 Wheei — A flanged or flange-less circular disc may be solid, built up or formed capable of 
turning ( rolling) about its central axis or on integral ball bearings. 

2.461 lV/7ee/ Z-oarf— Load of the machine including all static, dynamic, wind or seismic forces 
transferred to rail through wheels under operating or non-operating condition, 

2.462 Wheei Trac/c — See 2.327. 

2.463 WheelTruck — A set of fabricated frames fitted with rolling wheels that supports the main 
structure or carriage or bridge of an equipment imparting motion to the supported member by revolu- 
tions or wheels. 

2.464 Winch — A plane or grooved drum that can rotate so as to exert a storn pull while winding in 
a line. 

2.465 Winch Assembly ^ Winch equipped with worm wheel or gear and pinion, etc, for its rotation 
for hoisting of harrow or boom (stacker) conveyor. 

2.466 Winch Drum Shaft— A shaft on which winch drum is mounted in such assembly where gear 
and pinion are employed for winch's rotation. 

2.467 Wind Row Pile — A pile of bulk materials having different grain size andjDulk densities that 
is made of number of short comes through entire cross-section of pile. 

2.468 W/>7<//?owSfac/://7flr — The stacking method in which the stockpile is made covering entire 
cross-section of pile in number of layers of small heights, by travelling the stacker to and fro with 
various hoist positions of boom being coordinated with particular slew positions, that is, combining 
travelling, hoisting and slewing motions simultaneously. 

2.469 /art/ Conveyor— A ground based conveyor running along the length of the stockpile that 
discharge the incoming material, namely, a tripper ( and/or trailer ) onto the mobile equipment meant 
for stacking or loading. 



25 



1$ t tM63 ( P«rt 1> - f^ 

In this standard an attempt has been macie t0vx;over the terrr^ which are especially applicable 
to stacking, loading ^^ riec^i^^lM^ tqii^a^^ ma^itmi^ ^oomi^n&n^ such as conveyof 

systems, electrical equipment (motors, cables, )$witch gear, ect ) and general engineering terms 
relating to bearings, structure, etc, have been left out. Users of this standard are advised to refer 
to related standards, where appficable, covering the corresponding terminologies. 

This standard (Part 2) is one of the standards from the series of standards on glossary of 
terms relating to bulk handling equipment. The glossary of terms relating to cyclic loose bulk handl- 
ing equipment (non-stationary) is given in IS : 10463 ( Part 6 ) - 1983 and those of equipments for 
ur^fding, hydraulic conveying, pneumatic convey irtg and stationary — cyclic loose bulk handling are 
pf@1i0Sed to be covered subsequently. 



26 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, india 



