**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14689 (1999) : Code of Practice for Fire Safety in 
Industrial Buildings (Printing and Publishing Industry) 
[CED 36: Fire Safety] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14689 : 1999 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

SJ^Plch Wff 3 3TPT % ^m ^t ft% ^f^TT 

(*pi XTcf WSR ^^r) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FIRE SAFETY IN 

INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS 
(PRINTING AND PUBLISHING INDUSTRY) 



ICS 91.120; 13.220.20 



©BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1999 Price Group 3 



Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard has been adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fire 
Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Printing and Publishing activities have established themselves as an important industry in India. The buildings 
housing these industries are prone to fire hazards due to the materials in these industries. Different materials 
used and operations involved pose fire risks due to different reasons. Thus electrically operated machines may 
cause fires due to sparking, overloading and short-circuiting, while letterpress operation produces ink mist which 
adheres to walls, ceilings and being a flammable substance, poses a risk of fire. Also, many volatile substances 
having low flash points are used in different operations such as offsetting, wetting, etc. All raw materials such 
as paper, ink, solvents and thinners are highly flammable materials. 

Considering the high fire proneness of printing and publishing industries and their ubiquitous presence in all 
sorts of buildings alongside other activities makes it very important that utmost preventive as well as protective 
fire safety measures are provided for such buildings, housing these industries. This standard has been prepared 
with a view to give guidance for providing adequate safety against fire hazards in buildings, housing printing 
and publishing industries. 

Provisions of this code are supplementary to the relevant statutory requirements applicable to a particular area 
and the general guidelines for fire safety covered in relevant Indian Standards on fire safety. 

The composition of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
Annex B. 



IS 14689 : 1999 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FIRE SAFETY IN 

INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS 
(PRINTING AND PUBLISHING INDUSTRY) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard lays down the essential requirements 
for the fire safety of the printing and publishing 
industry. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in this text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards as given in Annex A. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1 1097 (Part 1) shall apply. 

4 APPLICABILITY 

4.1 These fire safety requirements should be 
applicable to all types and sizes of printing industry 
engaged in either the total process of paper printing or 
part thereof. 

4.2 In this standard only the fire safety 
requirements involved in printing industry are dealt. 
Other general safety requirements as given in IS 
12619 shall apply. 

5 CLASSIFICATION 

For the purpose of this standard, the buildings housing 
these industries should be classified as Group G 
(moderate hazard occupancy) in accordance with 
IS 1641. 

6 TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION 

All buildings of permanent nature should be of Type I 
Construction having external shell and load bearing 
elements of 4 hour fire resistance rating; while 
internal/non-load bearing walls should have 2 hour fire 
resistance rating. Floors should have same fire 
resistance .as that of external shells as laid down in 
IS 1642. 



7 SOURCES OF FIRE HAZARDS 
7.1 Building Housing the Industry 

7.1.1 Most of the big printing establishments are 
housed in buildings having mixed occupancy, thereby 
posing plural fire risks. Thus, many buildings housing 
printing press are found to have business and 
mercantile activities carried on in the same building. 
Some buildings housing these industries are also partly 
used as residential, educational or institutional 
buildings. One building may, thus pose several 
hazards in addition to printing press hazards. Besides 
above, the printing and publishing industries 
themselves usually have a storage godown for storing 
raw materials, especially paper and ink. 

7.1.2 Hence, in cases where fire risks cannot be 
seggregated by fire resistant walls, the strictest fire 
protection measures for highest risk shall apply to the 
whole building. 

7.2 Machinery 

Electrically operated machines are fraught with 
hazards of sparking, overloading and short-circuiting 
which may cause major fires. 

7.3 Operational Process 

7.3.1 Letterpress Operation 

This operation produces an ink mist which adheres to 
walls and ceilings and which, because of its oil 
content, present a fire hazard. 

7.3.2 Offsetting Operation 

This operation may require gas fired, oil fired or 
electric driers to obtain proper paper humidity. 
Isopropyl alcohol is generally used as wetting agent, 
which has a flash point of 12°C Sheet based offset is 
usually dried by spraying with a cornstarch based 
powder which has an explosive potential greater than 
that of coal-dust, 

7.3.3 Washing and Cleaning 

Printing usually involves frequent washing and 
cleaning with highly volatile solvents which may 
include naphtha, toluene and gasoline, all of which are 
highly flammable. 



IS 14689 : 1999 



7.4 Raw Materials 

7.4.1 The raw materials used in printing, such as ink, 
solvents, thinner and paper are all highly flammable 
or combustible. 

7.4.2 In motion through presses and other 
equipments, the paper may develop static electricity 
and provide an ignition source. 

7.5 Storage of Paper 

7.5.1 Indoor storage of roll paper present serious fire 
hazards. Fire grows rapidly in the flue like spaces 
formed due to stacking differing diameter rolls on ends 
in columns. Fire spread can quickly raise 
temperatures so high that exposed steel may fail 
structural ly . Steel failure may rupture sprinkler piping 
and deprive roll paper of fire protection at a time of 
maximum need. Fire spreading up the side of a paper 
column quickly burns through the outer ply paper 
which then unwinds and peels away from rolls, 
thereby increasing the burning surface. 

7.5.1.1 Initial fire development and intensity differ 
only slightly for different papers. Hard, thin and 
laminated papers burn somewhat faster than soft, thick 
and coated papers. Difference in types of papers are 
not important in regard to fire protection in on-end 
storage, because the extremely high temperatures 
developed are common to all types of papers. 

7.5.1.2 Although rolls stored on side avoid dangerous 
peeling, a fire in this case, which is well shielded from 
fire fighting efforts, may involve a larger portion of the 
storage and become quite intense in the vertical 
columns created between rolls. 

7.5.1.3 Paper is sometimes supported horizontally on 
racks by rods which run axially through the rolls. Such 
an arrangement because of the separation between 
rolls, has the same general fire characteristics as 
separated vertical stocks. 

7.6 Negligence or Prohibited Activity by Workers 

7.6.1 Errors in operation or maintenance of machines 
and improper handling or storage of materials may 
cause fire. 

7.6.2 Surreptious smoking and such other prohibited 
activities in risk areas may also cause fires. 

7.7 Canteen 

7.7.1 One or more staff canteens are very often 
operated in the printing press building. Hence, the 
risks generally associated with LPG cylinders 
constantly remain present in these buildings also. 

7.8 Wastes 

7.8.1 Every operation generates wastes and fire can 
flash across such deposits and spread. A large number 



of sprinkler heads may open as a result and thus may 
cause unwarranted water damage. 

7.8.2 Any movement of paper may generate static 
electricity and in such a situation, paper dust may 
provide an ignition source as well as explosive 
atmosphere. 

8 FIRE SAFETY MEASURES 

8.1 Genera] 

The usual causes of fires in printing and publishing 
industries include electrical equipment, static 
electricity, cutting and welding, lower humidity, 
surreptious smoking and bad house keeping. These 
causes should be given particular attention while 
deciding about fire safety measures. 

8.2 Fire Safety Measures in Buildings 

8.2.1 The constructional details, electrical 
installations and fire protection installations as 
recommended in relevant Indian Standards shall be 
provided. 

8.2.2 Internal decorations shall be of fire resisting 
materials, as specified in IS 1642. 

8.2.3 The buildings 15 or more in height shall be 
provided with wet riser system as per IS 3844. 

2 

8.2.4 Refuge area, not less than 15 m , shall be 
provided on external walls as per IS 1642. 

8.2.5 All electrical installations shall be done as 
recommended in IS 1 646 and National Electrical code. 

8.2.6 Service ducts shall be enclosed by walls and 
doors, if any, of 2 hours ratings. If the ducts are larger 
than 1 m area at the floor then proper sealing should 
be done. 

8.2.7 The airconditioning ducts where provided shall 
be as per the requirements given in IS 1642. 

8.2.8 Flame proof electrical equipments, light 
fittings, etc, should be provided in the process areas 
where flammable vapours are present. 

8.2.9 Adequate space shall be provided all round the 
building for fire brigade approach as required under 
the building byelaws applicable to that area. 

8.2.10 Water supplies for fire fighting shall be 
arranged as per IS 9688. Sprinklers shall be provided 
in adequate numbers, keeping in view the fact that the 
sprinklers are best suited and most reliable fire 
protection measure for majority of fire risks. 

8.2.11 All high rise buildings (compared to other 
surrounding buildings) shall have lighting protection 
as per IS 2309. 

8.2.12 Portable fire extinguishers of appropriate types 
should be deployed throughout the premises 



IS 14689 : 1999 



conforming to the requirements of IS 2190 and 
periodical inspection and maintenance should also be 
ensured. 

8.2.13 The requirements of wet riser and down comer 
installations and capacity of water storage tanks and 
fire pumps should be as given below: 

a) Less than 15 m in height 

2 

i) Plot area up to 250 m 
Installations 
Hose reel 
Wet riser 
Down comer 



Minimum requirements 
To be provided 



To be provided (for 
more than one storey) 

Yard hydrant — 

Automatic sprinkler — 

system 

Manually operated To be provided 

electric fire alarm 

system 

Automatic detection — 
and alarm system 

Underground static — 
water storage tank 

Terrace tank 5 000 1 (for hose reel) 

Near underground static — 

tank, fire pump with 

minimum pressure of 

03 N/mm 2 (3 kgt7cm 2 ) 

at terrace level 

Pump at terrace level 

with minimum pressure 

of03 N/mm 2 (3 kgf/cm 2 ) 



450 1/min (for hose 
reel) 



ii) Plot area 25 1 m 2 to 500 m 2 



Installations 
Hose reel 
Wet riser 
Down comer 

Yard hydrant 
Automatic sprinkler 
system 



Minimum requirements 
To be provided 

To be provided (for 
more than one storey) 

To be provided (in case 
of basement area is 
200 m 2 and more) 
To be provided 



Manually operated 

electric fire alarm system 

Automatic detection — 

and alarm system 

Underground static 25 0001 

water storage tank 

Terrace tank 5 000 1 (for hose reel) 

15 000 1 in case the 
basement area is 200 
m 2 and more 



Installations Minimum requirements 

Near underground One electric pump and 

static tank, fire pump one diesel pump of 

with minimum capacity 
pressure 

0.3 N/mm 2 (3 kgf/cm 2 ) 1 620 1/min and one 

at terrace level electric pump of 

capacity 180 1/min 

Pump at terrace level 450 1/min (900 1/min in 

with minimum case the basement area 

pressure of 0.3 N/cm 2 is 200 m 2 and more) 
(3 kgf/cm 2 ) 

iii) Plot area 501 m 2 to I 000 m 2 

Installations Minimum requirements 

Hose reel To be provided 

Wet riser To be provided (for 

more than one storey) 
Down comer To be provided (for 

more than one storey) 
Yard hydrant — 

Automatic sprinkler To be provided (in case 
system of basement area is 200 

m or more) 

Manually operated To be provided 

electric fire alarm 

system 

Automatic detection — 

and alarm system 

Underground static 25 0001 

water storage tank 

Terrace tank 5 000 1 for hose 

reel, 15 000 I in case 
basement area is 200 
m 2 or mere 

Near underground One electric pump and 

static tank, fire pump one diesel pump of 

with minimum capacity 

pressure of 

0.3 N/mm 2 (3 kgf/cm 2 ) 1 620 1/min and one 

at terrace level pump of capacity 180 

1/m 

Pump at terrace level 450 1/min (900 1/min in 

with minimum case the basement area 

pressure of 0.3 N/cm 2 is 200 m 2 and more) 

(3 kgf/cm 2 ) 

iv) Plot area 1 001 m and above 

Installations Minimum requirements 

Hose reel To be provided 

Wet riser To be provided (for 

more than one storey) 
Down comer To be provided (for 

more than one storey) 
Yard hydrant To be provided 



IS 14689 : 1999 



Installations 

Automatic sprinkler 
system 

Manually operated 

electric fire alarm 

system 

Automatic detection 

and alarm system 

Underground static 
water storage tank 

Terrace tank 



Near underground static 
tank, fire pump with, 
minimum pressure of 
03 N/mm 2 (3 kgf/cm 2 ) 
at terrace level 
Pump at terrace level 
with minimum 

pressure of 03 N/cm 2 
(3 kgf/cm 2 ) 



Minimum requirements 
To be provided (in case 
of basement area is 200 
m 2 or more) 
To be provided 



To be provided 
(depending upon the risk) 
35 000 1 (50 000 1 if 
ground floor covered 
area exceeds 1 000 m 2 ) 
10 000 1 (for hose 
reel, 30 000 1 in case the 
basement area is 200 
rn 2 or more) 
One electric pump and 
one diesel pump of 
capacity I 620 1/min 
and one electric pump 
of capacity 180 1/min 
450 1/min (900 1/min in 
case the basement area 
is 200 m and more) 



b) 15 m and above but not exceeding 18m 



Installations 

Hose reel 

Wet riser 

Down comer 

Yard hydrant 

Automatic sprinkler 

system 

Manually operated 
electric fire alarm 
system 

Automatic detection 
and alarm system 
Underground static 
water storage tank 



Terrace tank 
Near underground static 
tank, fire pump with 
minimum pressure of 
03 N/mm 2 (3 kgf/cm 2 ) 
at terrace level 
Pump at terrace level with 
minimum pressure of 03 
N/mm 2 (3 kgf/cm 2 ) 
NOTE — Buildings above 18 



Minimum requirements 

To be provided 

To be provided 

To be provided 

To be provided 

To be provided 

To be provided 



To be provided 

100 000! up to 500 m 2 
covered area per 
floor (150 000 1 if 
covered area exceed 
500 m 2 ) 
20 0001 

One electric pump and 
one diesel pump of 
capacity 2 850 1/min 
and one electric pump 
of capacity 180 1/min 
450 1/min (900 1/min in 
case the basement area 
is 200 m 2 and more) 
m in height not to be permitted. 



8.2.14 Proper relative humidity should be maintained 
in all machine operation rooms. 

8.3 Fire Safety in Machinery 

8.3.1 All machines shall be adequately earthed to 
dissipate static electricity. 

8.3.2 The machine which may produce spark shall 
have proper guards so as to minimize hazards from 
sparks. 

833 All machines shall be well maintained, 
lubricated and regularly cleaned to avoid frictiona! 
fires. 

8.3.4 Electrical connections to the machines shall be 
regularly checked, properly insulated and wherever 
necessary, replaced with new ones. 

8.3.5 Cornstarch based powder used for drying 
sheet-fed offset being explosive, it shall be 
periodically removed by vaccum cleaning to avoid 
accumulation and dust collectors (cleaner bags) 
emptied immediately. 

8.3.6 Static eliminators should be provided for the 
machines, where static electricity is generated. 

8.4 Raw Materials and Their Handling 

8.4.1 Proper rolls shall be handled carefully to prevent 
pieces of paper from being torn loose and left hanging. 
Such loose pieces should be trimmed off or taped 
tightly to rolls. Waste paper or broken roils shall not 
be stored with roll paper. 

8.4.2 Vehicles used for transporting the materials 
shall be kept properly maintained and all refuelling 
shall be done outside storage area. It will be desirable 
to provide spark arresters to these vehicles. 

8.5 For transporting flammable liquids within the 
process area, jerry cans with self closing lids should 
be used. 

8.6 Oily wastes should be kept in containers with 
closed lids. 

8.7 Storage 

8.7.1 Storage room shall be provided with a well 
designed automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler 
heads, shall conform to IS 9972. 

8.7.2 The top of the stored material shall be at least 
1 m below sprinkler deflectors to ensure effective 
water distribution. 

8.7.3 Fire access aisles with a width of at least 2.5 m 
shall be provided with distance between two aisles in 
one direction not exceeding 15 m. 



IS 14689 : 1999 



8.7.4 Absorbent papers such as tissue stock and, to a 
lesser extent, newsprint, swell when they absorb 
moisture. There shall, therefore be at least 0,6 m 
expansion space between storage and building walls. 

8.7.5 Paper dust or other combustible deposits shall 
not be allowed to accumulate on top of rolls or on 
ceilings, structural members or piping as a fire may 
flash across such deposits, thereby opening the 
sprinklers to the full extent depending upon the 
accumulations. 

8.7.6 Good housekeeping shall be strictly observed 
throughout the storage premises. All drains shall be 
regularly cleaned to avoid clogging. 

8.7.7 Store rooms for valuable baled waste shall be 
provided with sprinklers. 

8.7.8 Good housekeeping shall also be strictly 
observed in boundries where wastes are frequent. Use 
of cyclone or suction systems are recommended for 
removal of wastes. 

8.7.9 Location of stores/godowns for printing units, 
varnish, thinner, flammable liquids and paper/ 
cardboards should be in detached buildings. If it is not 



possible, these should be segregated from the 
adjoining blocks. 

8.7.10 Paint mixing area using flammable solvents 
should be in a detached building. It is not possible, it 
should be segregated from the adjoining blocks. 

8.8 Education of Workers on Fire Safety 

Workers shall be educated regarding fire hazards and 
necessity of observing fire prevention measures. They 
should also be trained in operation of fire fighting 
equipments. They shall be given practice in fire drills 
at suitable intervals. 

8.9 Proper fire order shall be framed and enforced. 
Smoking shall be strictly prohibited in hazardous 
places. If required, separate smoking booth may be 
provided for smokers. 

8.10 Canteen 

Canteen premises should also be provided with 
suitable fire fighting equipments. It will be preferable 
to keep the canteen outside the building. 

9 PERMISSION OF FIRE AUTHORITY 

No printing establishment shall start functioning 
without clearance from the local fire authority. 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. Title 

1641 : 1988 Code of practice for fire safety 

of buildings (general): General 
principles of fire grading and 
classification (first revision) 

1642 : 1988 Code of practice for fire safety of 

buildings (general): Details of con- 
struction (first revision) 

1646 : 1997 Code of practice for fire safety of 

buildings (general): Electrical 
installations (second revision) 

2190:1992 Code of practice for selection, 

installation and maintenance of 
portable first-aid fire extinguishers 

2309 : 1989 Practice for the protection of 

buildings and allied structures 
against lighting — Code of practice 
(second revision) 



IS No. 

3844 : 1989 



9688 : 1992 



9972: 1981 



Title 

Code of practice for provision and 
maintenance of internal fire 
hydrants and hose-reel on premises 
(first revision) 

Eye surgery instruments — Hooks, 
strabismus (first revision) 



Specification for 
sprinkler heads 



automatic 



11097 Glossary of terms for printing 

(Parti): 1984 machinery: Part 1 Fundamental 
terms 

12619 : 1989 Printing industry — Safety code 

SP 30 : 1984 National Electrical Code 



IS 14689 : 1999 



ANNEX B 

(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 



Chairman 
Shri J. N Vakil 

Members 

Assistant Security Commissioner 
Dr A. K. Bhalla 

Dr K. S. Uppal {Alternate) 
Chief Rre Officer 
Chief Rre Officer 
Shri R. N. Chachra 

Shri Sunil Das (Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Dheri 

Shri R. C. Sharma (Alternate) 
Shri S. M. Desai 

Fire Advisory 

Deputy Fire Advisor (Alternate) 
Fire Officer 
Shri P. N. Ghosh 
Shri J. S. Gahlaut 
Shri S. C. Gupta 

Shri Sanjeev Angra (Alternate) 
Shri M. M. Kapoor 

Shri ?. C. Singhal (Alternate) 
Shri T. R. A. Krishnan 

Shri P. K. Majumdar (Alternate) 
Col Kuldeep Singh 

Shri A. J. Pawar (Alternate) 
Shri A. R. Khan 

Shri Natrajan (Alternate) 
ShriG.B. Menon 

Member (Hydro-Construction Monitoring) 
Managing Director 

Shri D. K. Sarkar (Alternate) 
Shri V. B. Nikam 

Shri P. N. Panchal 
President 

Secretary 
Shri D. Padamhabha 

SHRlB. S. VENKATESH(A/rc/7iaf6T) 

ShriV. M. Ranikar 

Shri P. Madhusundava Rao 

ShriD. R. Krishna (Alternate) 
Dr T. P. Sharma 

Dr Gopal Krishnan (Alternate) 
Shri R. Sundarajan 

Shri S. K. Chattopadhyay (Alternate) 
ShriS. K. Shangari 

Lt-Col A. T. Parnaik 
Shri P. K. Sunkaria 

Shri K. C. Mathur (Alternate) 
Shri Vinod Kumar, 
Director (Civ Engg) 



Representing 
Tariff Adivsory Committee, Ahmadabad 



Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 
Ministry of Defence (CEESO), New Delhi 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 

Municipal Corporation of Mumbai (Mumbai Fire Brigade) 

Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Ltd, Ranchi 

Delhi fire Service, Government of Delhi, New Delhi 

In personal capacity (B-4/5A.G, Khan Road Municipal Officers 

Society, Worli, Mumbai) 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

In personal capacity (J-1916, Chittranjan Park, New Delhi-19) 

State Bank of India, Mumbai 

Lloyd Insulation (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Tariff Advisory Committee, Delhi/ Ahmadabad 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance, Pune 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal/Trichy 

In personal capacity (16, Aniket Society Manjalpur, Vadodara) 

Central Electricity Authroity, New Delhi 

Loss Prevention Association of India Ltd, Mumbai 

In personal capacity (4/34, Haji Ali Municipal Officers Cooperative 

Housing Society, Mumbai) 
In personal capacity (46, Block E~l, Pocket II, Sector 15, Rohini, Delhi) 
Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, New Delhi 

Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, 

Mumbai 
Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Engineer-in -Chief s Branch, New Delhi 

Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, Ministry of Industry, 

New Delhi 
Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 

Member-Secretary 

Shri S. Chaturvedi 
Joint Director (Civ Engg), BIS 



