**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 11866 (1987) : Alpha, Beta, and Alpha-beta Contamination 
meters and Monitors [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



in^Stm StanJafd 



IS : 11E««-19BT 
lEC Pub 32:S (t$31) 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR ALPHA. BETA, AND ALPIfA-BETA 

CONTAMINATION METERS AND MONITORS 

(lECTiiie ■ Atphaj Bcia an J AEpha-ticLLi Ccmtaminaiioti Meters and MDiiiior&) 



UDC 53fll2 074 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK bHAVAN^ 9 BAHAPUR &HAH ZAtAR MARG 
NEW DtlHI llWWl 

^|. ^ Ftbrttar/ I9B3 



UDC539-12-074 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR ALPHA, BETA, AND ALPHA-BETA 

CONTAMINATION METERS AND MONITORS 

(lEC Title : Alpha, B^a and Alpha-Beta Contamination Meters and Monitors) 



Natioiial Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with lEC Pub 325 (1981) 'Alpha, beta and alpha-beta 
contamination meters and monitors', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (lEC) was 
adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Nuclear Instrumentation 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard*. 

Cross References 

In this standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following i 

International Standard 



lEC Pub 38 (1983) lEC Standard voltages 



lECPub 50 (391) (1975) International Electro- 
technical Vocabulary : Detection and measure- 
ment of ionizing radiation by electric means 

lECPub 50 (392) (1976) International Electro- 
technical Vocabulary : Nuclear Instrumentation 
— Supplement to Chapter 391 

lEC Pub 68-2-27 (1972) Basic environmental 
testing procedures, Part 2 : Tests — Test Ea : 
Shock 



lEC Pub 86 (1982) Primary batteries 

lEC Pub 181 (1964) Index of electrical measuring 
apparatus used in connection with ionizing 
radiation 

lEC Pub 18 1 A (1965) First supplement 

lEC Pub 278 (1968) Documentation to be supplied 
with electronic measuring apparatus 



lEC Pub 293 (1968) Supply voltages for transis- 
torized nuclear instruments 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS: 585-1962 Voltages and frequency for ac 
transmission and distribution systems 
(revised) 



IS : 1885 (Part 63) - 1985 Electrotechnical voca- 
bulary: Part 63 Nuclear instrumentation 



IS : 9000 (Part 7/Sec 1)-1979 Basic environmen- 
tal testing procedures for electronic and 
electrical items: Part 7 Impact test, -Section 1 
Shock 

IS : 203-1972 Dry batteries for flashlights 



IS : 6756-1972 Technical documentation to be 
supplied with electronic measuring equip- 
ment 



The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provision of these lEC standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with 
this standard. 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while 
adopting it in this Indian Standard. 



Adopted 28 January 1987 



O February 1988, BIS 



Gr 9 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 11866 -1987 
lEC Pab 325 (1981) 



CONTENTS 

Page 



CHAPTER I: GENERAL 



Clause 



1 . Scope •* 

2. Object 4 

3. Terminology ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ . 4 

4. Tests ^ 

5. Classification of assemblies " 

CHAPTER 11: SURFACE CONTAMINATION METERS AND MONITORS 

Section One - General requirements 

6. Detection sub-assemblies ' 

7. Ease of decontamination ' 

8. Sealing 7 

9. Alann threshold ' 

10. Local indication ' 

11. Effective range of measurement * 

12. Display 9 

1 3. Mechanical shocks 9 

14. Setting up and maintenance facilities for electronic equipment 9 

Section Two - General test procedures 

15. General , 9 

16. Basic principles 9 

17. Background 13 

1 8. Statistical fluctuations - • • M 

Section Three - Radiation characteristics 

19. General 13 

20. Surface activity response ' • 13 

21 . Dependence of response on source position 14 

22. Relative intrinsic error 14 

23. Variation of response with radiation energy t6 

24. Response to other ionizing radiations 17 

25. Inherent background count rate 18 

Section Four - Electrical characteristics 

26. Statistical fluctuations 18 

27. Response time 19 

28. Inter-relationship between response time and statistical fluctuations .' . ■ ■ 20 

29. Alarm threshold drift 20 

30. Warm-up time test (for portable assemblies) 20 

31. Resolution time 21 

32. Overload protection 21 

33. Ambient temperature 21 

34. Relative humidity '. ^l 

35. Power supply 22 

36. Storage ■■ Zi 

37. Identification certificate 23 

Table I - Reference conditions and standard test conditions 10 

Table II - Tests performed under standard test conditions 11 

Table III - Tests performed with variation of influence quantities 11 



( lEC page 3 ) 



18:11866-1987 
EEC Pub 325 (1981) 



CHAPTER I: GENERAL 

1. Scope 

1.1 This standard is applicable to radiation meters and monitors designed to measure or detect 

surface contamination by alpha and 'or beta radiation emitting nuclides and which comprise at 
least : 

- a detection sub-assembly (comprising counter tube, scintillation detector, semiconductor 
detector, etc.), which may be connected either rigidly or by means of-a flexible cable or 
incorporated into a single assembly with 

- a measuring sub-assembly. 

Radiation meters and monitors are defined in Amendment No. 1 to TEC Publication 181: 
Index of Electrical Measuring Apparatus Used in Connection with Ionizing Radiation, as 
follows : 

Radiation meter 

An assembly including one or seveial radiation detectors and associated sub-assemblies or 
basic function units and designed to measure quantities connected with ionizing radiation 
(activity, exposure rate, etc.). 

(Radiation) monitor 

A radiation meter provided with means for giving perceptible warning (generally optical or 
acoustical) that the quantity connected with ionizing radiation exceeds some adjustable 
predetermined value or that the measured value is not within some adjustable predetermined 
limits. 

1.2 The standard is applicable in its entirety to: 

alpha surface contamination meters; 

- alpha surface contamination monitors: 

- beta surface contamination meters; 

- beta surface contamination monitors; 
as i-iefined below: 

Alpha (beta, alpha-beta) surface contamination meter 

An assembly including one or more radiation detectors and associated sub-assemblies or 
basic function units and designed to measure alpha (beta, alpha-beta) activity per unit surface 
area associated with the contamination of the surface under examination. 

Alpha (beta, alpha-beta) surface contamination monitor 

Alpha (beta, alpha-beta) activity meter provided with means for giving perceptible warning 
(generally visual or audible) that the indicated activity per unit surface area associated with the 
contamination of the surface under examination exceeds some adjustable predetermined value 
or that the measured value is not within some adjustable predetermined limits. 



( lEC page 7 ) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 

1.3 The standard is also applicable to special-purpose assemblies and to assemblies specifkally 

designed for a surface of a particular nature (e.g. laundry, floors). However, some of the 
requirements may need to be amended or supplemented according to the particular 
requirements applicable to such assemblies. 

1.4 If an assembly has been designed to carry out combined functions, it shall comply with the 
requirements pertaining to these different functions. If, on the other hand, it has been designed 
to perform one function, and, in addition, it is also capable of carrying out other functions, 
then it shall comply with the requirements for the first function, and it would be desirable for 
it to comply with requirements pertaining to the others. 

2. Object 

To lay down standard requirements; to give examples of acceptable methods; to specify 
general characteristics, general test conditions, radiation characteristics, electrical safety and 
environmental characteristics, and also the identification certificate. 

The requirements given below pertain to assemblies as defined in Clause 1 . It is possible, 
however, to use assemblies which do not meet the requirements set out below when such 
requirements are not deemed essential for a given purpose. In such cases, the requiremwits to 
be applied to the assemblies shall be specified by agreement between the manufacturer and the 
user, but the methods used for the determination of the characteristics of the assemblies shall 
conform with this standard. 

3. Terminology 

The general terminology concerning the detection and measurement of ionizing radiation 
and nuclear instrumentation is given in lEC Publications: I.E.V, 50(391)*, I.E.V. 50(392)**; 
181, 181A***, and Amendment No. 1 to Publication 181. 

For the purposes of this publication, the following definitions apply: 

3.1 Effective range of measurement 

The range of counts per unit time within which the requirements or this standard are met. 

3.2 Surface activity response 

The response of the detector used in conjunction with the assemblies under the given 
geometrical conditions specified by the manufacturer, expressed in counts per unit time, 
corrected for background, divided by the conventionally true activity per unit area, together 
with the name of the radionuclide used, e.g. : 

Surface activity response (s-^ Bq-i • cm^) or (s-i nCi-^ • cm^) name of radionuclide = 

count rate (in counts -s-i) 



surface activity (in Bq ■ cm-^) or (in \iC\ ■ cm-2) 
3.3 Thin radioactive source 



name of radionuclide 



A radioactive source, the thickness of which, including any protective cover, is sufficiently 
small to ensure that absorption within the material of the source of the radiation of interest, 
emitted by radioactive material, is negligible. 



* International Electrotechnical Vocabulary, Chapter 391 : Detection and Measurement of Ionizing Radiation by 

Electric Means. 
** Chapter 392: Nuclear Instrumentation. 
**♦ First supplement to I EC Publication 181. 



(IECiMge9) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pnb 325 (1981) 



3.4 Response time 



The time taken to indicate 63% of an instantaneous change in the level of contamination 
being measured. 

3.5 Total equivalent thickness 

The thickness, generally expressed in mass per unit area that a particle (alpha or beta), 
emitted normally from the contaminated surface, crosses in order to reach the sensitive volume 
of the detector. This thickness includes the distance covered in air plus the detector window 
thickness and, sometimes, the thickness of any screen fitted over the detector window which 
protects it from contamination. 

3.6 Error of indication 

The difference between the indicated activity per unit area and the conventionally true 
activity per unit area at the point of measurement. 

3.7 Relative error of indication 

The quotient, expressed as a percentage, of the error of indication divided by the 
conventionally true activity per unit area. 

3.8 Relative intrinsic error 

The relative error of indication of an assembly referred to a specified reference radionuclide 
under specified reference conditions. 

3.9 Coefficient of variation V 

Ratio (F) of the standard deviation ((t) to the value of the arithmetic mean (3c) of a set of n 
measurements (Xj) given by the following formula: 



fT 1 

F = - = - 

X X 



1 " 

— ZM.^i-x)2 



n-1 I 



3.10 Minimum detectable activity per unit area 

That activity per unit area giving an indication which corresponds to twice the standard 
deviation of the indication given by a specified background count rate for a given measuring 
time or time constant of the ratemeter. 

This activity per unit area shall be expressed in Bq • cm ^ or (nCi ■ cm-^). 

3.11 Conventionally true value of a quantity 

The conventionally true value of a quantity is the best estimate of the value of that 
quantity. This will usually be the value determined by, or traceable to, a secondary or primary 
standard or by a reference instrument which has been calibrated against a secondary or 
primary standard. 

Units 

in this standard, the units used are the multiples and sub-multiples of units of the 
International System of Units (SI)*. For the radiation quantities and dosimetric terms, the 



* International Bureau of Weights and Measures: The International System of Units (SI), third edition, 1977. 



HEC page tl ) 



18:11866-1987 
DEC Pub 325 (1981) 

values expressed in the old units (curie, rad, rem) are also indicated in brackets. The following 
non-SI units are also used: 

Time: years, days, hours (h), minutes (min). 

For energy: electron-voh (eV) (1 eV = 1.602- lO'^ J). 

Definitions of the radiation quantities and dosimetric terms are given in Document 
45(I.E.V. 391-392) (Secretariat)211. 



4. Tests 

4.1 Qualification tests 

Qualification tests are performed in order to verify that the requirements of a specification 
are fulfilled. 

Qualification tests are subdivided into type tests, acceptance tests and routine tests. 

4.2 Type test 

"A test of one or more devices made to a certain design to show that the design meets 
certain specifications" (I.E. V. 151-04-15). 

4.3 Routine test 

"A test to which each individual device is subjected during or after manufacture to ascertain 
whether it complies with certain criteria" (I.E.V. 151-04-16). 

4.4 Acceptance test 

"A contractual test to prove to the customer that the device meets certain conditions of its 
specification" (I.E.V. 151-04-20). 

5. Classification of assemblies 

Assemblies are classified: 

5.1 According to the type of radiation as: 

- alpha contamination meters or monitors 

- beta contamination meters or monitors 

- alpha-beta contamination meters or monitors. 

5.2 According to their use as: 

- installed assemblies 

- transportable assemblies 

- portable assemblies. 

5.3 According to their power supplies: 

- mains 

- primary or secondary batteries. 



( lEC pace 13) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 



CHAPTER II: SURFACE CONTAMINATION METERS AND MONITORS 



SECTION ONE - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



6. Detection Sub-assemblies 

Detection sub-assemblies shall be so designed that in operation the sensitive volume of the 
detector can be placed less than 5 mm, in the case of alpha detectors, and less than 20 mm, in 
the case of beta detectors, from the surface under examination. 

The nature and thickness of the material that has to be traversed by an alpha or beta 
particle in order to reach the sensitive volume of the detector (i.e. the window material and 
thickness) shall be stated in terms of equivalent mass per unit area. 

For a beta detector, the requirements of Clause 20 will be met, in general, with windows the 
mass per unit area of which does not exceed 35 mg • cm-2. When response is required to 
beta-emitting radionuclides having maximum beta energies less than or equal to 250 keV, e.g. 
•''C and 3-^S, the mass per unit area shall not exceed 5 mg ■ cm~2. 

If the sensitive surface of the detector is provided with a protective grille, this should not 
obscure more than 20% of the window area (indoor use), or 45% of the window area (general 
use). The nominal value shall be stated by the manufacturer. 

Both the total area and the sensitive area of the detection sub-assembly shall be stated. 

If the detector requires a supply of counting gas, the manufacturer shall state the type of 
gas supply required and the flow rate. 

7. Ease of decontamination 

The assembly shall be so constructed that its decontamination is facilitated. It is 
recommended that it be provided, for example, with a smooth non-porous external surface 
which is free from crevices. Alternatively, it shall be possible to use at least the measuring 
sub-assembly when placed in a thin and flexible envelope which is either disposable or easy to 
decontaminate and which is provided with transparent parts to permit the instrument scale to 
be read. 

8. Sealing 

For assemblies intended for outdoor use, the manufacturer shall state the precautions that 
have been taken to prevent the ingress of moisture. 

9. Alarm threshold (This clause is applicable to monitors only) 

A monitor shall include circuits necessary for tripping an alarm at one or more thresholds. 
The number of tripping levels shall be subject to agreement between manufacturer and user. 

The values of alarm threshold shall be given either as percentages of ranges of adjustment 
or in terms of the units of the display. 



( lEC page 15) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Fob 325 (1981) 

AH trip units shall be capable of convenient operational checking by means of test signals or 
through the use of radioactive sources. 

The jange of adjustment shall be specified and the value of the alarm thieshold shall be 
capable of being adjusted to any point within this range. It shall not be possfete "'to 
incapacitate the alarm by any means such as setting the alarm thresholds beyond range limits. 
If a mute facility is provided it shall automatically reset when the alarm condition ceases. 

Alarm threshold adjustments shall not be easily accessible to the operator. For transportable 
and installed assemblies there shall be at least one set of contacts available, operated by the 
trip unit, for external alarm purposes. They shall be operational under normal operating 
conditions. For portable assemblies, this facility may be provided by agreement between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 



10. Local indication 

10.1 For contamination meters 

In addition to the visual indication of count rate, an audible indication of count rate shall 
be provided. There shall be a facility for muting this indication. 

10.2 For monitors 

In addition to the audible indication of count rate above, there shall be either an audible 
indication of contamination above a certain pre-set value or visual indication. Although the 
audible indication may be produced by the same transducer as the indication of count rate, it 
shall be distinctly different from this indication. 



1 1 . Effective range of measurement 

For linearly scaled assemblies, the effective range of measurement shall be from 10% to 
100% of each range. 

For logarithmically scaled assemblies, the effective range of measurement shall be between 
one-third of the least significant decade and full scale. 

For digitally scaled assemblies, the effective range of measurement shall be from the start of 
the second least significant digit to the full range of indication available. 

The manufacturer shall state the effective range of measurement for each scale range. For 
assemblies with more than one scale range, the useful ranges of measurement shall overlap. 

For beta contamination meters provided with linear scales the most sensitive range shall 
have a maximum reading corresponding to a count rate of at least five counts per second. 

For alpha contamination meters provided with linear scales the most sensitive range shall 
have a maximum reading corresponding to a count rate of at least one count per second. In 
this case it must be recognized, however, that the requirements on statistical fluctuation 
(Clause 26) and response time (Clause 27) cannot both be met for count rates less than 
three counts per second. 



(lEC page 17) 



18:11866-1987 
EC Pub 325(1981) 

12. Display 

Instrument indications shall be expressed in counts per unit time. 

13. Mechanical shocks 

Portable assemblies shall be able to withstand without damage mechanical shocks from all 
directions involving a peak acceleration of 300 m • s~2 (^30 g) for a time interval of 18 ms, 
the shape of the shock being semi-sinusoidal (see I EC Publication 68-2-27: Basic 
Environmental Testing Procedures, Part 2: Tests - Test Ea: Shock). 



14. Setting up and maintenance facilities for electronic equipment 

In addition to an adequate instruction and maintenance manual, all assemblies shall be 
provided with sufficient easily accessible test points to facilitate setting up and fault location, 
together with, where necessary, maintenance aids such as extension printed wiring boards, 
extension leads and special maintenance tools. 



SECTION TWO - GENERAL TEST PROCEDURES 



15. General 

With the exception of the routine tests described in Sub-clauses 20.2 and 22.3.2, all tests 
enumerated in the following clauses are to be considered as "type tests". 

Nevertheless, some of these tests may, by agreement between the manufacturer and 
purchaser, be considered to be acceptance tests. Unless otherwise specified, the requirements 
corresponding to the tests shall be met over the whole effective range of measurement of the 
instrument. 

16. Basic principles 

16.1 Standard test conditions 

Standard test conditions are defined in Table I. The tests described in this standard may be 
classified according to whether or not they are performed under standard test conditions. 



16.2 Tests performed under standard test conditions 

Tests which are performed under standard test conditions are listed in Table II which 
indicates, for each characteristic, the requirement (permissible variation in indication) and the 
sub-clause where the corresponding test method is described. 

16.3 Tests performed with variation of influence quantities 

These tests are intended to determine the effects of variations in influence quantities, and are 
given in Table III with the rapge of variation of each influence quantity and limits of 
consequent variation in the indication of an assembly. 



(lEC pageiJ) 



IS:1186(>-1987 
mC Pub 325 (1981) i 

In order to test the effect of variation in any one of the influence quantities listed in 
Table III, all other influence quantities shall be maintained within the limits for standard test 
conditions given in Table I, unless otherwise specified in the test procedure concerned. 

In order to simplify these tests, for each individual principal influence quantity, only the 
routine test concerning the intrinsic error need be performed. 

Other aspects of the performance of the assembly need to be tested with variation of 
influence quantities only if it is considered that the routine test specified will not give a 
representative indication. 

16.4 Permissible variation in indication with variation of influence quantity 

For each influence quantity taken separately and with the remaining influence quantities 
maintained within the ranges given in Table I, a nominal operating range is defined within 
which the variation in indication shall remain within the limits stated by the manufacturer, 
which limits shall in -no case exceed the values laid down in Table III. The variation is 
determined in relation to the value fixed in the reference condition. 

These tests are intended as sampling tests, the fraction of assemblies sampled being fixed by 
agreement between the manufacturer and the user. 

Table I 
Reference conditions and standard test conditions 



Influence quantity 


Reference conditions 


Standard test condition 


Warm-up time 


15 min 


>:15 min 


Ambient temperature 


20 °C 


18 °C to 22 °C 


Relative humidity 


65% 


55% to 75% 


Atmospheric pressure 


101.3 kPa 


86 kPa to 106 kPa 


Power supply voltage 


Nominal power supply voltage 


Nominal power supply voltage 

i;n±i% 


Power supply frequency 


Nominal frequency / 


Nominal frequency f ± 2% 


Power supply waveform 


Sinusoidal 


Total harmonic distortion lower 
than 5% 


Ambient gamma radiation 


Absorbed dose rate in air less 
than 0.2 HGyh"' 
(20nradh-') 


Absorbed dose rate m air less than 
0.25t:Gyh-i (25Mradh-i) 


Electromagnetic field of 
external origin 


Negligible 


Less than the lowest value that 
causes interference 


Magnetic induction of external 
origin 


Negligible 


Less than twice the induction due 
to the earth's magnetic field 


Orientation of the assembly 


To be stated by the 
manufacturer 


Stated orientation ±2° 


Setting of instrument controls 


Set up for normal operation 


Set up for normal operation 


Contamination by radioactive 
materials 


Negligible 


Negligible 



(IECpage21> 



IS:118<>6-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 



Table II 

Tests performed under standard test conditions 



Characteristic under test 


Requirement 


Method of test 
(clause/sub-clause) 


Surface activity response 


To be stated by the manufacturer 


20.2 


Dependence of response on source 
position 


To be stated by the manufacturer 


21 


Relative intrinsic error * 


Within ±25% 


22.3 


Minimum detectable activity per unit 
area of reference nuclide 


To be stated by the manufacturer 


22.4 


Statistical fluctuations 


Coefficient of variation less than 
20% 


26.2 


Response time 


Less than 4 s 


27.2 


Alarm trip level drift (maximum 
value) 


±20% of set point level over a 
period of 24 h 


29.2 



* This value is additional to the uncertainty in the conventionally true activity per unit area of the test sources. 

Table III 
Tests performed with variation of influence quantities 



Influence quantity 


Range of values 


Limits of variation 


Method of test 




of influence quantity 


indication 


(clause/sub-clause) 


Radiation energy: 








Alpha meters and 


No specification 




_ 


monitors 








Beta meters and 


At least over the range of 


To be stated by the 


23.2.2 


monitors 


values of £'max from 
0.4 MeV to 1.0 MeV 


manufacturer 




Ambient gamma 


Absorbed dose rate in air 






radiation: 


of: 






Alpha meters and 


Up to lOmGyh-i 


±25% 


24.2.1 


monitors 


(1 radh-i) 






Beta meters and 


Up to 10 nGy • h-i 


To be stated by the 


24.2.2 


monitors 


(1 mradh-') 


manufacturer 




Dual purpose (alpha 


Up to 10 nGyh-' 


To be stated by the 


24.2.2 


and beta meters and 


(Imradh-i) 


manufacturer 




monitors) 








Beta radiation 


In the presence of a '"Sr/ 


Alpha meters and 


24.3 




'"Y source of not less 


monitors: ±25% 






than 3.7 MBq at a 


Dual purpose (alpha and 






distance equal to or 


beta) meters and 






greater than 5 cm 


monitors: to be stated 








by the manufacturer 




Alpha radiation 


Alpha emitter of 239Pu or 


Beta meters and monitors: 


24.4 




^-tiAm at a distance of 


to be stated by the 






I cm from the probe 


manufacturer 





11 



(lEC page 23) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pab 325 (1981) 



Table III (continued) 



Influence quantity 


Range of values 
of influence quantity 


. limits of variation 
•■"of indication 


Method of test 
(clause/sub-clause) 


Neutrons 


No specification 






Inherent background 


Absorbed gamma dose 
rate in air 0.2 nGyh"' 
(20nradh-i) 


Count rate to be stated 
by the manufacturer 


25 


Warm-up (portable 
assemblies) 


■ 1 min 
3 min 


±25% 1) 
±10% 1) 


30 


Ambient temperature 2) 


Indoor use: +10°C to 

+ 35 °C 
Outdoor use 2): -10 °C to 

45 "C 


± 15% I' 
±20%') 


33.2 


Relative humidity 


Up to 90% at 30 °C 


± 10% ') 


34.2 


Supply voltage:- 

a) a.c. mains 

b) primary batteries 

c) secondary batteries 


From 88% C/n to 110% 

(£/n = nominal supply 

voltage) 
After 24 h continuous use 

After 12 h continuous use 


± 10% 

± 10% of the initial 

indication 
± 10% of the initial 

indication 


35.2 

35.4 
35.4 


Overload 


Activity corresponding to 
100 times the activity 
that would give full 
scale deflection on each 
range 


To remain in excess of 
full scale for 5 min 


32.2 


Storage 


-25 °C to +50 °C 


To meet the limits of this 
specification 


36 



'> Of the indication under 

-' Assemblies intended for 

assemblies intended for 



standard test conditions. 

temperate climates. For hotter and colder climates, different limits may be specified. For 

operation at very low temperature, means of heating the batteries may be provided. 



16.5 Test sources 

For the purposes of this standard, sources shall be mounted on a material having a low 
coefficient of back-scatter, e.g., plastic or aluminium. /The test sources used shall be such that 
the conventionally true activity per unit area of each source is known within 10% in absolute 
terms and ±5% relative to other source activities of the same test set. The design and 
construction of test sources shall take into account the work of ISO/TC 85/SG 2. 



16.6 Reference radionuclides 

16.6.1 Alpha emitters 

The reference radionuclide is 24iAm or 2.^9pu. 



(IECi>age25) 



12 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 

16.6.2 Beta emitters 

The reference radionuclide is 20471 

If the probe is designed to be used for the measurement of beta particles of maximum 
energy less than 250 keV, the reference radionuclide shall be '^c. 

17. Background 

The background indicated by the instrument shall be subtracted from the observed signal by 
any procedure including calculation. 

18. Statistical fluctuations 

For any test involving the use of radiation, if the magnitude of the statistical fluctuations of 
the indication, arising from the random nature of the emission of radiation alone, is a 
significant fraction of the variation of the indication permitted in the test, then siifficient 
readings shall be taken to ensure that the mean value of such readings may be estimated with 
sufficient precision to demonstrate compliance with the requirement in question. The interval 
between such readings shall be at least three times the response time to ensure that the 
readings are statistically independent. 



SECTION THREE - RADIATION CHARACTERISTICS 

19. General 

The manufacturer shall state the distance between the front face of the detector and the 
active surface of the test source to be used for the determination of the radiation 
characteristics of the assembly. 

20. Surface activity response 

20.1 Requirements 

The measurement of surface activity response (see Sub-clause 3.2) is a routine test and shall 
be performed on each production assembly. The manufacturer shall then state in the test 
certificate the surface activity response of the assembly to the appropriate reference 
radionuclide. 

20.2 Methods of measuring the surface activity response 

Whenever a suitable source is available, the test specified in Sub-clause 20.2.1 shall be 
employed. In other circumstances the test specified in Sub-clause 20.2.2 shall be used instead. 



20.2.1 It is strongly recommended that the surface activity response of the detection sub-assembly 
be measured with a thin, uncollimated source with an area larger than that of the detector and 
whose activity per unit area is known to within 10% in absolute terms. Where a thin source is 
not available, an alternative source whose surface emission rate per unit area is known to 
within 10% in absolute terms may be used. 



f 3 ( lEC page 27 > 



IS: 11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 

20.2.2 In the absence of a source with an area sufficient to meet the requirement of Sub-clause 
20.2.1, a source of smaller area than the detector may be used, provided measurements are 
taken at a sufficient number of positions of the source for the total of all measurements made 
to provide' a measure of the surface activity response with a comparable accuracy. 



21. Dependence of response on source position 

Small area ("point") sources are frequently used for checking the constancy of the response 
of a surface contamination meter or monitor. 

The response of the detection sub-assembly to such a "point" source, situated on the surface 
under examination will, in general, vary with the position of the source relative to the probe 
and the transmission of the grille. 

The manufacturer shall state: 

21.1 The variation in the response of the probe with respect of the position of the source relative 
to the window of the probe. 

21.2 The radiation transmission of the protective grille. 



22. Relative intrinsic error 

22.1 Mode of expression 

The relative intrinsic error E, of the indication of the instrument, expressed in per cent is 
given by the relationship: 

£ (%) = ^^ • 100 
S 

where S is the surface activity response for a reference radionuclide, established in Sub-clause 
20.1 and S' is the measured surface activity response to the same radionuclide measured by the 
test given in Sub-clause 22.3. 

22.2 Requirements 

Under standard test conditions the relative intrinsic error E, in the indication of the 
assembly to the relevant reference radionuclides shall not exceed ±25% over the whole of the 
effective range of measurement. 

Note. — This error does not include the uncertainty in the value of the conventionally true surface activity per unit 
area for the test source used (see Sub-clause 16.5). 

22.3 Method of test 

A type test shall be carried out on at least one assembly of the series and the routine test 
shall be performed on each assembly. 

22.3.1 Type test 

For assemblies provided with substantially linear scales, the type test shall consist of 
measurements of the relative intrinsic error carried out on all ranges, and on at least three 
points on each of them, at about 85%, 60% and 30% ol the scale maximum. 



(lEC page 29) 

14 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 

For assemblies with substantially logarithmic scales, or with digital presentation, the test 
shall be performed for at least three values in each decade of the effective range of 
measurement. _ 

At least the tests corresponding to the lowest and highest indications shall be performed 
with test sources. 

Tests at intermediate indications "may be performed by means of electronic pulse injection in 
which case the requirements of Sub-clause 22.3.3 shall apply. 



22.3.2 Routine test 

For assemblies with substantially linear scales, the routine test shall be performed at one 
point on each range between 50% and 75% of the scale maximum. For assemblies with a 
substantially logarithmic graduation or digital presentation, the test shall be performed for one 
value in each decade of the effective range of measurement. 

At least one of these tests shall be performed with a test source. The remaining tests may 
be performed by means of electronic pulse injection, in which case the requirements of 
Sob-clause 22.3.3 shall apply. 



22.3.3 Electronic method of test 

In the event that the full range of count rates required for the above test cannot be 
provided by the test sources, it is permissible to substitute an equivalent electrical test in order 
to determine the relative intrinsic error at the count rates that cannot be provided by the 
sources of radiation. 

The electrical signal must be of a form to simulate as closely as possible the form of signal 
delivered by the detector and shall be injected at a point that will test the whole of the 
assembly apart from the detector itself. 

If / is the indicated count rate when the assembly is subjected to the reference radiation 
source available, then an electrical signal shall be injected such as to produce the same 
indication, /. 

Let this signal be Q. 

Then if another indication / is produced by an input q, the relative intrinsic error E is 
given by: 

£(%) = r4~0 ■ ^00 

and the observations must be within the limits given in Sub-clause 22.2 above. 

If the electrical method of test is used, this should be stated in the accompanying 
documents. 



22.3.4 Method of interpretation of observations 

In determining whether the requirements of Sub-clause 22.2 are met, it is necessary to make 
allowances for the uncertainty in the values of the conventionally true activity per unit area of 
the test sources employed. 



^g (lECpageaiJ 



18:11866-1987 
DEC PDb 325 (1981) 

If the observations fall within both of the following limits, the requirements of Sub-clause 22.2 
can be considered to be met: 

i) no single observed value of E shall exceed ±35%; 

ii) the difference between any of the observed values of E shall not exceed 50%. 

22.4 Minimum detectable activity per unit area 

The minimum detectable activity per unit area (see Sub-clause 3.10) for tiie relevant 
reference radionuclides in a gamma radiatioii background at the upper limit of standard test 
conditions, i.e. 250 nGyh-i (25 uradh-') shall be stated by the manufacturer. 



23. Variation of response with radiation energy 

23.1 Alpha contamination meters or monitors 

No specification. 

23.2 Beta contamination meters or monitors 

23.2.1 Requirements 

In addition to the measurement specified in Sub-clause 20.2, the surface activity response of 
the assembly shall be measured with beta emitters of at least three different maximum energies 
distributed as follows: 

- one not more than 0.4 MeV 

- one between 0.4 MeV and 1 MeV 

- one not less than 1 MeV. 

As a guide, suitable radionuclides are: 
i^C (maximum beta energy 0.155 MeV, half-Ufe 5730 years); 
•^5S (maximum beta energy 0.167 MeV, half-life 87.1 days); 
i47Pm (maximum beta energy 0.22 MeV, half-life 2.6 years); 
i8?W (maximum beta energy 0.43 MeV, half-life 74 days); 
3<*C1 (maximum beta energy 0.714 MeV, half-life 3.08- 10? years); 
204X1 (maximum beta energy 0.77 MeV, half-life 3.8 years); 
2iOBi (maximum beta energy 1.17 MeV, half-life 5 days); 
»9Sr (maximum energy 1.46 MeV, half-life 51 days). 

The manufacturer shall state: 

a) the radionuclides for which the surface activity response has been measured; 

b) the value of surface activity response for each one of them; 

c) the value of surface activity response for 204ji ; 

d) the beta particle maximum energy below which the surface activity response falls to less 
than 5% of the surface activity response to 20471. 



23.2.2 Method of test 

The method of measurement of surface activity resfjonse for each radionuclide used shall be 
in accordance with the requirements of Sub-clause 20.2. 

Whenever a suitable source is available, the test specified in Sub-clause 20.2.1 shall be 
employed. In other circumstances the test specified in Sub-clause 20.2.2 shall be used instead. 



16 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pob 325 (1981) 



24. Response to other ionizing radiations 



24. 1 General 



Assemblies for the measurement of surface contamination shall be designed to reduce as far 
as possible the influence of other ionizing radiation. 

It is recommended that a beta probe be provided with some form of shutter to make it 
possible to distinguish beta radiation from gamma radiation. 

The shutter thickness shall be stated in terms of equivalent mass per unit area. 



24.2 Gamma radiation 

lA.lA Alpha contamination meters and monitors 

a) First, the detector shall be subjected to a gamma absorbed dose rate in air of not less than 
lOmGyh"' (1 radh"') provided as below, and the count rate noted. 

b) Second, the detector shall be irradiated with a test source of alpha radiation of such an 
activity as to give an indication on the most sensitive range of the assembly (or within the 
lowest decade in the case of a logarithmic scale) and the count rate noted. 

c) It shall then be subjected to a gamma absorbed dose rate in air of not less than 
10 mGyh"' (1 radh-') at the same time as it is irradiated with the test source of alpha 
radiation. The same source configurations shall be used as for the measurements in a) and 
b) above. The count rate shall remain within the limits specified in Table III. 

The reason for this test is that some types of alpha contamination measuring assemblies are 
affected indirectly by gamma radiation in that, although the gamma radiation itself does not 
produce any indication, the sensitivity to alpha radiation may be altered in these conditions. 

The absorbed dose rates given above shall be provided by a sealed source of "^"Co. 



24.2.2 Beta contamination meters and monitors 

The detector shall be irradiated at a gamma absorbed dose rate in air of not less than 
10 ^Gyh~' (1 mradh"') and the count rate noted. The result shall be given in counts per 
unit time for a gamma absorbed dose rate in air of 10 nGyh~' (1 mradh"')- 

The absorbed dose rate given above shall be provided by a sealed source of ''^Co. 



24.3 Beta radiation (for alpha contamination meters and monitors) 

A source of ^<'Sr ^OY of activity not less than 3.7 MBq (100 |iCi) with no transverse 
dimension more than 10 mm shall be used. 

a) First, place the test source of alpha radiation at a point 5 mm in front of the detector and 
note the count rate. For this test, the source of alpha radiation shall have dimensions that 
are small compared with the window area of the detector and a sufficiently low activity for 
the reading to be in the most sensitive range of an assembly with linear scales, or the most 
sensitive decade for an assembly with a logarithmic scale or digital display. 



17 (lECpagess) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pnb 325 (1981) 

b) Second, without moving either the detector or the alpha source, place the beta source at a 

distance of 50 mm in front of the detector. 
The count rate shall remain within the limits specified in Table III. 

24.4 Alpha radiation (for beta contamination meters and monitors) 

This test is only applicable to probes having an equivalent window thickness having a mass 
per unit area less than 5 mg ■ cm~2. 

A thin source of an alpha emitter, for example --^^Pu or 24iAm shall be placed at a distance 
of not more than 10 mm from the surface of the probe. The covering of the source, if any, 
shall have an equivalent thickness of less ^an 1 mg • cm"-. 

The response shall be given in counts per unit time per unit activity of the alpha emitter. 



24.5 Neutrons 

A test for neutron response is not mandatory and need only be carried out if this 
requirement is specified. The nature of the test shall be subject to agreement between the 
manufacturer and the user. 



25. lahcreBt bsckgromd coont rate 

The count rate due to the background for a gamma absorbed dose rate in air of not more 
than 0.2 nGyh"' (20 |iradh~') shall be stated by the manufacturer. 



SECTION FOUR - ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS 



26. Statistical ftuctiiatioas 

26. 1 Requirements 

Owing to the random nature of alpha and beta particle emission, the indications of a 
contamination meter fluctuate about an average value. 

The coefficient of variation of the indication due to these random fluctuations shall be less 
than 20%. 

This requirement applies to any contamination level exceeding that corresponding to the 
following indications: 

- linear scales: 

one-third of the scale maximum on the most sensitive range; 

- logarithmic scales: 

three times the lowest significant graduation on the scale; 

- digital display: 

ten times the value of the least significant digit. 

This does not preclude the possibility of having selectable time constants, not all of which 
need meet this requirement. 

The manufacturer shall state which time constants meet this requirement. 



(IECp«»e37) 

18 



IS:118<»6-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 



26.2 Method of test 



Expose the assembly to a source of radiation giving an indication between one-third and 
one-half of scale maximum on the most sensitive range (linear scale) or the most sensitive 
decade (logarithmic scale) or an indication of the figure one in the second least significant 
digit (digital displays). 

Take a series of at least 20 readings of the indication of the assembly at convenient tinie 
intervals. In order that the readings shall be substantially independent from one another, this 
time interval shall be not less than that corresponding to three times the time constant of the 
measuring assembly. Find the mean value and the coefficient of variation of all the readings 
taken. The coefficient of variation so determined shall lie within the limits of Sub-clause 26.1. 



27. Response time 

27.1 Requirements 

The response time shall be such that, if there is a sudden change in the contamination being 
measured, the indication will reach the following value in less than 4 s: 

63 

Ni -h {Nt - Ni) 

100 

where N, is the initial indication and Nf the final indication. The response time shall be 

stated by the manufacturer. 

27.2 Method of test 

The test may be carried out either with a suitable source of radiation or by the injection of 
a suitable electrical signal into the input of the measuring assembly. 

For linearly scaled assemblies, th€ difference between the initial and final count rates shall 
be at least half of the maximum reading on the range under test. (Since in practice the 
response time will decrease with decreasing sensitivity, the requirement of this specification will 
be met by a test on the lower range.) 

For logarithmically scaled assemblies, the initial and final count rates shall differ by a factor 
of 10 or more. The lower count rate shall not exceed one-third of the least significant 
complete decade. 

Measurements shall be made for both an increase and a decrease in count rate indication. 

If the electrical method of test is employed, the injected signals shall correspond to the 
above requirements. 

For the increasing count rate test, the assembly shall be subjected first to^the higher count 
rate and the indication Nf noted. 

The assembly shall then be subjected to the lower count rate for a time sufficient for the 
indication N, to reach a steady value and this indication noted. 

The count rate shall then be changed as quickly as possible to that corresponding to the 
indication A^r and the time taken to reach the value given by the formula in Sub-clause 27.1 
measured. 

The decreasing count rate test shall be performed in the same way with the count rates 
correspondirig to A^f and A^, interchanged. 



19 (IECpage39) 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 

28. Inter-relationship between response time and statistical fluctuations 

The response time and coefficient of variation of the statistical fluctuations are inter- 
dependenf characteristics, acceptable limits for which are given in Clauses 26 and 27. 

For high contamination levels, it is recommended that, whenever possible, the response time 
be reduced, while conforming to the limits laid down for the statistical fluctuations. 

If the limits in Clauses 26 and 27 can be met with a response time of not more than one 
second, it is preferable to reduce the statistical fluctuations rather than to reduce the response 
time below 1 s. 

For contamination levels below those for which the above requirements can be met, the 
manufacturer shall state the appropriate values of the coefficient of variation and response 
time. 

29. Alarm threshold drift 

This clause is applicable to monitors only. 

29. 1 Requirements 

For an assembly whose alarm threshold (trip threshold) has been determined by means of a 
radioactive source or a pulse generator, if 80% of the threshold value is applied for 24 h, no 
tripping shall occur. If 120% of the threshold value is applied, tripping shall occur within 1 min. 

29.2 Method of test 

For an assembly where the alarm threshold may be set at different values, this test should 
be carried out on each appropriate decade on a logarithmically scaled assembly and on each 
appropriate range of a linearly scaled assemoly where the setting is dependent on the range 
setting. 

Because of the random nature of radiation emission, the test should be carried out using a 
pulse generator of uniformly spaced pulses, in place of the detection sub-assembly. 

Let S be the set point value of the alarm threshold under test and X the pulse rate to which 
5 corresponds (according to the data supplied by the manufacturer). 

The following conditions shall be satisfied: 

29.2.1 With the trip not activated, apply a pulse rate of 0.8 X. No trip shall occur for a period of 
24 h with the threshold value set at S. 



29.2.2 With the trip not activated, apply a pulse rate of \.2 X and ensure that the assembly trips 
within 1 min. This test sha;ll be repeated at least 4 times at time intervals T to 2T where T is 
at least 6 h. 

30. Warm-up time test (for portable assemblies) 

With the assembly previously switched off for a period sufficient for the internal 
temperature of the assembly to be in equilibrium with the ambient air temperature, expose the 
detector to an appropriate source of radiation. Switch on the assembly and take readings every 



(IECpage4LU 

20 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pob 325 (1981) 

20 s from 40 s to 300 s after switching on: 15 min after switching on, take at least ten readings 
and take the mean value of these as the "final value" of the indication. 

The difference between the final value and the values read from the curve at 1 min and 
3 min shall lie* within the limits specified in Table III. 

31. Resolution time 

The loss in count rate due to the resolution time of the assembly should not exceed 20% of 
the true count rate at any point of the effective range of measurement. If this limit is 
exceeded, the meter scale shall be marked accordingly. 

When not taken into account by the graduation, the resolution time shall be stated by the 
manufacturer. 

32. Overioad protectiwi 

32.1 Requirements 

For activities greater than that corresponding to full-scale deflection, the indication of the 
assembly shall be out of scale at the higher end of the scale range and shall remain so. For 
assemblies with more than one scale range, this requirement shall apply to each scale range. 



32.2 Method of test 

Compliance with this requirement is tested by submitting the assembly for 5 min to an 
activity of at least 100 times that corresponding to full-scale deflection of each scale. 

33. Ambient temperature 

33.1 Requirements 

Over the range of temperature specified- in Table III, the indication shall remain within the 
limits specified in that table. 

33.2 Method of test 

It will normally be necessary to carry out this test in a climatic box. A reference source 
shall be used to provide some indication. It is not, in general, necessary to control the 
humidity of the air in the box unless the assembly is particularly sensitive to changes in 
humidity. In this case the effect should be noted. 

The temperature should be maintained at each of its extreme values for at least 4 h and the 
indication of the assembly measured during the last 30 min of this period. 



34. Relative humidity 

34. 1 Requirements 

The indication of the assembly shall not vary by more than 10% from that obtained 
urider standard test conditions for any value of relative humidity up to 90%. A test of this 



2^ ( lEC page 43i 



IS: 11866 -1987 
lEC Pub 325 (1981) 

influence quantity is only required if the effects of relative humidity are considered to be 
significant. 

34.2 Method of test 

The test may be carried out at a single temperature of 30 °C, using a climatic box. The 
permitted variation of ± 10% in the indication is additional to the permitted variation due to 
the effects of temperature alone. 



35. Power supply 

35.1 Mains operation 

Mains operated assemblies shall be designed to operate from single-phase supply voltage in 
one of the following categories, in accordance with I EC Publication 293: Supply Voltage for 
Transistorized Nuclear Instruments * : 

Series 1-220 V 

Series 11-120 V and 'or 240 V 

The assemblies shall be capable of operating from mains with a supply voltage tolerance of 
+ 10% and -12% and a supply frequency of 60±3 Hz or 50±3 Hz. 



35.2 Mains operation test 

Expose the detector to appropriate sources of radiation of sufficient activity to give a count 
rate corresponding to approximately two-thirds full-scale deflection on the most and on the 
least sensitive range or decade respectively. 

Note the indication with the supply voltage at its nominal value. 

Note the indication with the supply voltage 10% above and 12% below the nominal value. 

These shall not differ from those at the nominal supply voltage by more than 10%. 

35.3 Battery operation 

When power is supplied by primary batteries, the capacity of these shall be such that after 
40 h of intermittent use ** or 24 h of continuous use without the threshold trip operating, the 
indication of the assembly does not differ by more than 10% from the initial value. 

When power is supplied by secondary batteries, the capacity of these shall be such that after 
12 h of continuous operation, the indicated reading value does not differ from the initial 
reading by more than 10%. 

Facilities shall be provided to check the battery condition under maximum load. 



* lEC Publication 293 (1968) makes reference to the third edition of lEC Publication 38: lEC Standard Voltages. 
Table I in that edition is however superseded by Amendment No. 1 (August 1977) in which 220 V is no longer 
recommended lor new systems. (230 V is recommended instead.) lEC Publication 293 may eventually be amended 
accordingly. 
** Intermittent use, means periods of use of 4 h separated by intervals of at least 1 h. giving a total on-time of 
40 h. 



(IECpage45) .. 

22 



18:11866-1987 
lEC Pob 325 (1981) 

The minimum battery check indication for which the performance of the assembly will 
remain within the requirements of this specification shall be clearly marked on the meter 
scale. 

When primary batteries' are used these should be preferably of R 20 type defined in lEC 
Publication 86: Primaii^ Cells and Batteries. The nominal voltage of R 20 type is 1.5 V. 

Batteries may be cojihocted in any desired manner bui shall be mdividually replaceable; the 
correct polarity shall be dearly indicated on the assembly by the manufacturer. 

If secondary batteries are used, it shall be possible to recharge the batteries from the mains 
supply in 16 h. 

The use of a device which switches off the charger when the complete charge is obtained is 
recommended. 

35.4 Method of test for battery-supplied assembly 

New primary batteries or fully charged secondary batteries of the type recommended by the 
manufacturer shall be used for this test. Expose the detector to appropriate sources of 
radiation of sufficient activity to give a count rate corresponding to approximately two-thirds 
full scale deflection on the most sensitive and on the least sensitive scale ranges respectively. If 
a loudspeaker is fitted to this assembly it shall be switched on. The threshold trip shall not be 
operating. 

Take the mean of 10 consecutive readings of count rate in each case. Leave the assembly 
continuously working in front of those sources for 24 h (for primary battery operated 
assemblies) or 12 h (for secondary battery-operated assemblies). At the end of this time, again 
take the mean of 10 consecutive readings of count rate in each case. These mean values shall 
not differ from those obtained at the beginning by more than 10%. 



36. Storage 

All assemblies designed for use in temperate regions shall be designed to operate within the 
specifications of this standard following storage (or transport) for a period of at least three 
months in the manufacturer's packaging at a temperature from -25 °C to + 50 °C without 
batteries. 

In certain circumstances, more severe specifications may be required such as capability for 
withstanding air transport at low ambient pressure. 



37. Identification certificate 

An identification certificate shall accompany each assembly giving at least the following 
information * : 

37. 1 In respect of the measuring sub-assembly : 

37.1.1 Manufacturer's name or registered trade njark. 



• See I EC Publication 278: Documentation to be Supplied with Electrical Measuring Apparatus. 



23 ( ffiC page 47!) 



18:11866-1987 
lECPnb 325(1981) 

37.1.2 Type of the sub-assembly and serial number. 

37.1.3 Scale limits for each measuring range. 

37.1.4 Effective range o/m^ftsureme/iV. This information shall be given for each probe intended for 

use with the assembly. 

37.2 In respect of each detection sub-assembly: 

37.2.1 The information in Sub-clause 37.1, 

37.2.2 Surface activity response for a specific nuclide. 

37.2.3 Response as a function of bet^ radiation energy (for beta detectors). 

y 

37.2.4 Dependence of response on .source position. 

37.2.5 Total and sensitive area of the detector window. 

37.2.6 Materials of the wall between the source and sensitive volume of the detector and mass per 
unit area of each of them in mgcm~-. 



(IECpage49) ^^ 



