***•••*•**•••••• 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 


Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
'The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live' 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


IS  14392  (1996) :  General  considerations  for 
telecommunication  services  for  electronic  power  systems 
[LITD  10:  Power  System  Control  and  Associated 
Communications  1 


^^^^^r 


C^IJIA^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 


5?5im  |7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 


-<:-<:^vv^^ 


^ 


ik 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


Vii^ 


i4> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14392   :  1996 
lEC  1085  (1992) 

WJ^ft^  HH4y  (  Reaffirmed  2001  ) 

Indian  Standard 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS  FOR 

TELECOMMUNICATION  SERVICES  FOR 

ELECTRIC  POWER  SYSTEMS 


ICS  33.040.10;  29.240.30 


©BIS  1996 

BUREAUOF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK      BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR     MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

^^^V  1996  Price  Group     12 


Power  Line  Carrier  Systems  and  Associated  Telecontrol  Equipment  Sectional  Committee,  LTD  25 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  lEC  Pub  1085  (1992)  'General  considerations  for 
telecommunication  services  for  electric  power  systems',  issued  by  the  International  Electrotechnical 
Commission  (lEC),  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  Power 
Line  Carrier  Systems  and  Associated  Telecontrol  Equipment  Sectional  Committee,  LTD  25  and 
approval  of  the  Electronics  and  Telecommunication  Division  Council. 

The  text  of  the  lEC  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without 
deviations.  Certain  conventions  are,  however,  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian  Standards. 
Attention  is  particularly  drawn  to  the  following: 

Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be  read 
as  'Indian  Standard'. 

CROSS  REFERENCES 

Inthis  Indian  Standard,  the  following  International  Standards  are  referred  to.  Read  in  their  respective 
places  the  following: 

International  Standard  Corresponding  Indian  Standard 


lEC  870-1  :  Telecontrol  equipment 
and  systems  —  Part  1 ;  General  con- 
siderations 

lEC  870-2  :  Telecontrol  equipment 
and  systems  —  Part  2  :  Operating 
considerations 

lEC  a70-3  (1989)  Telecontrol  equip- 
ment and  systems  —  Part  3  :  Inter- 
faces (Electrical  characteristics) 

lEC  870-4  (1990)  Telecontrol  equip- 
ment and  systems  —  Part  4  :  Perfor- 
mance requirements 

lEC  870-5  Telecontrol  equipment  and 
systems  —  Part  5  :  Transmission 
protocols 

lEC  50  (371)  (1984)  International 
electrotechnical  vocabulary  (lEV)  — 
Chapter  371  :Telecontrol 

lEC  834-1  (1988)  Performance  and 
testing  of  teleprotection  equipment  of 
power  systems  —  Part  1  :  Narrow- 
band command  systems 

lEC  353  (1989)  Line  traps  for  a.c. 
power  systems 


IS  12746  (Part  1/Sec  1)  :  1996 
Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  — 
Part  1  General  considerations  {under 
preparation) 

IS  12746  (Part  2)  :  1989  Telecontrol 
equipment  and  systems:  Part  2  En- 
vironmental conditions  and  power 
supplies 

IS  12746  (Part  3)  :  1995  Telecontrol 
equipment  and  systems  :  Part  3  Inter- 
faces (electrical  characteristics) 

IS  12746  (Part  4)  :  1993  Telecontrol 
equipment  and  systems :  Part  4  Perfor- 
mance requirements 

!S  12746  (Part  5)  :  1993  Telecontrol 
equipment  and  systems:  Part  5  Trans- 
mission protocols 

IS  1 885  (Part  50)  :  1 985  Electrotechni- 
cal vocabulary:  Part  50  Telecontrol 

IS  1 3968  (Part  1  /Sec  1  -5) :  1 994  Perfor- 
mance and  testing  of  teleprotection 
equipment  of  power  systems:  Part  1 
narrow-band  command  systems 

IS  8792  :  1995  Line  traps  for  Ac  power 
systems  —  Specification  (first  revision) 
IS  8793  :  1995  Line  traps  for  AC  power 
systems    —    Methods    of    test    {first 
revision) 


Degree  of 
Equivalence 

Identical 


Identical 


Identical 


Identical 


Identical 


Technically 
Equivalent 

Technically 
Equivalent 


Technically 
Equivalent 
Technically 
Equivalent 


(Continued  on  ttiird  cover) 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 

Indian  Standard 

GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS  FOR 

TELECOMMUNICATION  SERVICES  FOR 

ELECTRIC  POWER  SYSTEMS 

1     Scope 

This  Technical  Report  Is  intended  to  give  an  overview  of  the  specific  problems  and  require- 
ments for  electric  power  utility  telecommunication  systems. 


2     Normative  references  to  related  international  standards  and  reports 

The  following  standards  contains  provisions  which,  through  reference  in  this  text,  consti- 
tute provisions  of  this  Technical  Report.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  editions  indicated 
were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 
Technical  Report  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent 
editions  of  the  standards  listed  below.  Members  of  lEC  and  ISO  maintain  -registers  of 
currently  valid  International  Standards. 


There  are  many  international  standards  and  reports  covering  the  topics  considered  in  this 
report  and  the  following  subclauses  detail  those  relevant  to  each  aspect. 


2.1      General 

Guide  for  planning  of  power  systems  telecommunication  systems  (1985).* 


ANSI/IEEE  STD  367  -  1987:  IEEE  recommended  practises  for  determining  the  electric 
power  station  ground  potential  rise  and  induced  voltage  from  a  power  fault. 

2.2     Telecontrol 

In  the  area  of  telecontrol  the  lEC  Technical  Committee  No.  57  is  in  the  process  ot  produc- 
ing a  very  useful  publication.  This  publication.  lEC  870,  consists  of  six  parts  as  follows: 


I  EC  870-1 :  Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  -  Part  1:  General  considerations. 
I  EC  870-2:  Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  -  Part  2:  Operating  considerations. 


lEC  870-3:  1989,  Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  -  Part  3:  Interfaces  (electrical  charac- 
teristics). 


Published  by  CIGRE  Working  Group  O-l  otStudy  Committee  35 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 

lEC  870-4:  1990,  Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  -  Part  4:  Performance  requirements. 
I  EC  870-5:  Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  -  Part  5:  Transmission  protocols. 


I  EC  870-6:  Telecontrol  equipment  and  systems  -  Part  6:  Telecontrol  protocols  compatible 
with  ISO  and  CCITT  standards  (under  consideration). 

The  following  two  documents,  published  by  the  lEC  and  IEEE  respectively,  are  also  very 
useful: 

lEC  50(371):  1984.  International  Electrotechnical  Vocabulary  (lEV)  -  Chapter  371:  Telecon- 
trol. 

IEEE  P  565/D3  5-27-77:  Manual  of  automatic  and  supervisory  station  control  data  organi- 
sation. 

2.3  Teleprotection 

lEC  Technical  Committee  No.  57  has  produced  the  following  standards  on  performance 
and  testing  of  teleprotection  equipment: 

lEC  834-1 :  1988,  Performance  and  testing  of  teleprotection  equipment  of  power  systems  - 
Part  1:  Narrow-band  command  systems. 

I  EC  834-2:   Performance  and  testing  of  teleprotection  equipment  of  power  systems  - 
Part  2:  Analogue  comparison  systems  (in  preparation). 

2.4  Power  line  carrier  (PLC) 

lEC  Technical  Committee  No.  57  has  produced  the  following  standards: 

lEC  353: 1989,  Line  traps  for  a.c.  power  systems. 

I  EC  481 :  1974,  Coupling  devices  for  power  line  carrier  systems. 


I  EC  495:  1974.  Recommended  values  for  characteristic  input  and  output  quantities  of 
single  sideband  power  line  carrier  terminals. 

I  EC  663:  1980,  Planning  of  (single  sideband)  power  line  carrier  systems. 


2.5     Radio 

Recommendations  and  reports  of  the  CCIR,  XVIth  Plenary  Assembly.  1986,  Volume  IX  - 
Part  1 :  Fixed  service  using  radio-relay  systems. 

Recommendations  and  reports  of  the  CCIR,  XVIth  Plenary  Assembly.  1986,  Volume  VIM  - 
Parts, 1-3:  Mobile  services. 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

2.6  CCITT 

.      FDM: 

CCITT  Blue  Book  (1988)  -  Volume  III  -  Fascicle  III-2:  International  analogue  carrier 

systems.  Transmission  media  characteristics. 

.     TDM: 

CCITT  Blue  Book  (1988)  -  Volume  III  -  Fascicle  III-3:  Digital  Networks.  Transmission 

system  and  multiplexing  equipment 

.     CCITT  Blue  Book  (1988)  -  Volume  VIM  -  Fascicle  VIII-7:  Data  communication 
networks.  Message  handling  systems.  Recommendations  X.400  -  X.420. 

2 . 7  Electro  -magnetic  compatibility 
immunity  tests  (!EC  801  and  I  EC  1  000  series). 


3     General 

An  electric  power  system  consists  of  a  number  ot  power  stations  (thermal  and  hydro) 
located  in  different  parts  ot  a  country  supplying  electric  power  via  a  transmission  and  distri- 
bution network  to  feed  loads  which  are  spread  across  the  territory  and  are  remote  from  the 
power  stations.  The  transmission  network  connects  the  power  stations  to  substations 
where  switching  and  transformation  to  lower  voltages  takes  place  and  from  where  loads, 
domestic  and  industrialare  supplied  via  a  distribution  network. 


An  electric  power  system  is  frequently  referred  to  as  an  electrical  public  utility.  In  order  to 
administer  and  operate  the  utility,  in  addition  to  the  power  stations,  transmission  and  distri- 
bution substations,  a  number  of  other  units  can  be  Identified  (see  figure  1).  These  are: 

-  a  headquarters  to  run  the  utility; 

one  or  more  control  centres  to  determine  which  power-stations  should  operate  and 
how  the  transmission  and  distribution  network  shall  be  used; 

-  one  or  more  maintenance  centres; 

one  or  more  computing  centres  for  support  of  the  control  centre(s)  and  for  support 
of  headquarters. 

These  units  obviously  cannot  work  in  isolation  and  hence  require  telecommunication 
services.  The  following  subclauses  in  clause  3  identify  the  functions  to  be  executed  and 
the  consequent  telecommunication  services  needed  to  satisfy  the  functions. 

3.1      Functions 

3.1.1     Administrative  telephony  {see  V\QUfe  2) 

At  the  most  basic  level  headquarters  will  need  to  communicate  with  all  locations  within  the 
utility  by  voice,  that  is  telephony,  and  may  also  wish  to  use  telex  and  facsimile  services 
and,  increasingly,  electronic  mail  services.  The  locations  will  also  wish  to  communicate 
with  one  another. 


IS   14392  :  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

Locations  will  also  need  telephone  connections  to  outside  of  the  utility,  that  is  via  the 
public  switched  telephone  network  (PSTN)  and  this  may  again  include  telex  and  facsimile 
services. 


3.1.2     Operational  telephony  (see  figure  3} 

The  control  centre(s)  requires  rapid  and  simple  telephone  access  to  the  power  stations, 
substations  and  the  maintenance  centre(s).  Telephone  access  is  also  required  to  neigh- 
bouring power  utilities  for  the  purpose  of  scheduling  the  interchange  of  electrical  power. 


3.1 .3      Telecontrol  (SCADA)  (see  figure  4) 

In  order  that  the  control  centre  can  carry  out  its  function  it  needs  to  be  provided  with  ail 
the  information  about  the  power  system,  namely  status  positions  (i.e.  monitored  informa- 
tion such  as  circuit-breakers,  isolators,  alarms}*  measurands,  integrated  totals,  etc.,  from 
the  power  stations  (thermal  and  hydro)  and  substations  which  are  of  course  remote  from 
the  control  centre.  It  is  also  necessary  to  control  electrical  and  hydraulic  plant.  H  load 
frequency  control  (LFC  -  also  known  as  Automatic  Generation  Control)  is  used  then 
remote  control  of  the  turbine-alternators  at  the  power  stations  will  also  be  required. 


In  the  case  of  hydro-electric  power  stations  hydraulic  data,  such  as  rainfall  and  water 
level,  also  needs  to  be  returned  to  the  control  centre. 


At  the  control  centre(s)  this  information  is  used  to  drive  a  man-machine  interface  con- 
sisting of  mimic  diagrams  and  visual  display  units  (VDU's). 

The  system  used  to  handle  all  these  aspects  is  known  as  a  telecontrol  system  or  SCADA 
(Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition)  system. 


3. 1 .4     Load  management  (see  figure  5) 

An  electrical  power  utility  may  wish  to  improve  its  system  load  factor  throughout  the  day 
by  offering  incentives  to  customers  to  utilise  electric  power  at  particular  periods  of  the  day. 
This  function  1%  known  as  load  management  and  is  achieved  by  the  remote  switching  in  or 
out  Of  loads.  Lwd  management  may  be  under  the  control  of  the  control  centre  or  it  may  be 
an  automatic  feature  such  as  when  it  Is  used  for  the  control  of  street  lighting. 


3. 1 .5     Teleprotection  (see  f igu re  6) 

Where  the  occurrence  of  an  incident  on  the  power  system  requires  protective  action  at 
another  location  teleprotection  is  used. 


IS  14392:1996 
\EC  1085    (1992) 


3.1.6      Mobile  radio  (see  fiaure  7\ 


In  support  of  the  operation  ot  the  power  system,  under  the  control  of  the  control  centre(s), 
there  will  be  a  maintenance  organisation  with  one  or  more  locations  in  the  territory 
covered  by  the  utility.  These  maintenance  centres  will  have  mobile  crews  who  can  be 
reached  either  in  their  vehicles  or  directly  on  a  "walkie-talkie"  basis.  For  this,  mobile  radio 
is  used  typically  in  the  VHF  (70-165  fwlHz)  and  UHF  (400-470  MHz)  bands. 


3.1.7     Computing  traffic  (see  figure  8) 

In  modern  utilities  it  is  usual  to  have  at  least  one  main-frame  computer  with,  in  addition, 
smaller  mini-computers  located  elsewhere  connected  to  the  main-frame. 

The  main-frame  may  be  used  by  the  control  centre  for  off-line  planning  studies.  It  may 
also  be  used  for  administrative  services  such  as  wages  and  billing. 


3.2      Telecommunication  services 

3.2.1      Administrative  telephony 

To  satisfy  the  administrative  needs  of  the  utility  (3.1.1)  a  private  network  is  usually 
provided,  which  makes  use  of  suitable  communication  media  (see  5.1)  together  with 
private  automatic  exchanges  and.  if  the  network  is  large  enough,  with  transit  exchanges. 


For  connection  to  the  public  network,  public  exchange  lines  are  usually  provided  to  all 
locations  requiring  the  service. 

3.2.2     Operational  telephony 

To  satisfy  the  operational  telephony  needs  (3.1.2)  a  special  purpose  telephone  system  is 
usually  provided  with  key  calling  of  a  limited  repertoire  of  extensions  and,  where  such  a 
system  is  shared  with  the  administrative  private  network  (3.2.1).  a  priority  feature  which 
ensures  that  the  control  engineer  always  has  access  to  the  desired  extension. 


3.2.3      Telecontrol 

Telecontrol  systems  (3.1.3)  consist  of  equipment  at  the  control  centre(s).  sometimes 
called  master  station(s),  connected  via  suitable  communication  media  to  outstations 
located  in  the  power  stations  (thermal  and  hydro)  and  substations.  These  outstations  are 
interfaced  to  the  relevant  electrical  parameters  and  receive  commands  and  return  informa- 
tion rapidly,  accurately  and  continuously. 


At  the  control  centre(s)  the  equipment  consists  of  mini-computers  working  with  the  out- 
stations and  animating  the  mimic  diagrams  and  VDU's. 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 

32.4     Load  management 

Where  load  management  is  applied  to  domestic  or  industrial  loads  by  remote  tele- 
switching,  requiring  access  to  a  large  number  of  consumers,  one  way  radio  communication 
may  be  quite  sulficient,  in  which  case  there  is  one  central  radio  transmitter  and  many  radio 
receivers. 

On  the  other  hand  where  control  of  street  lighting  or  control  of  domestic  electric  water 
heating  is  required,  mains  borne  signalling  may  be  used  (also  known  as  ripple  control). 


3.2.5  Teleprotection 

Teleprotection  systems  provide  a  means  of  transmitting  protection  information  or  protec- 
tion commands  from  one  location  to  another  via  suitable  communication  media.  Fast, 
reliable  and  error  free  operation  is  essential  for  such  services. 

3.2.6  Mobile  radio 

For  mobile  radio  systems  with  a  defined  area  to  be  covered  there  will  typically  be  one  or 
more  base  stations  connected  to  the  maintenance  centre  by  suitable  communication 
media.  The  vehicles  will  be  equiped  with  a  radio  transmitter/receiver  with  access  to  one  or 
more  radio  channels  in  the  VHF  or  UHF  band.  Hand  portables  may  also  be  used  in  this 
application  and  where  the  service  distances  are  small,  UHF  is  usually  preferred.  Where 
vehicles  are  used,  some  may  be  equipped  with  a  text  message  capability. 


3.2.7      Computing  traffic 

Computing  traffic  usually  consists  of  targe  amounts  of  data  transferred  either  to  or  from  or 
both  ways  into  the  main-frame.  There  may  also  be  a  large  amount  of  interactive  traffic. 


Such  traffic  requires  error  protection  as  well  as  high  speed  signalling,  typically  2,4  kbits/s, 
9,6  kbits/s,  or  64  kbits/s  and  even  higher.  Suitable  communication  media  are  required  for 
such  traffic. 

3.2.8     Other  services 

Telex,  facsimile  and  electrorflo  mail  traffic  usually  consists  of  small  amounts  of  data 
transferred  between  operational  and  administration  centres.  Signalling  speeds  range  from 
50  bits/s  for  telex  to  2,4  kbits/s  for  facsimile  and  electronic  mail.  No  error  protection  is 
usually  provided  for  telex  and  facsimile;  error  protection  is  provided  however  for  electronic 
mail  systems  based  on  the  CCITT  Recommendation  X.400.  Suitable  communication  media 
are  needed  for  all  such  traffic.  Message  switching  facilities  for  telex  and  electronic  mail 
bring  extra  benefits  at  reasonable  cost. 


IS   14392:1996 
lEC   1085     (1992) 


3.2-^9      Public  address  system  (PA  System) 


Public  address  systems  are  widely  used  by  electrical  power  utilities  for  administration, 
salety  (fire,  radiation,  evacuation)  and  operational  broadcasts.  For  internal  power  station 
operational  requirements  where  only  one  way  communication  is  necessary,  a  PA  system 
provides  a  very  convenient  means  of  communicating  to  a  group  ot  people  collectively. 


3.2.10     Network  management 

It  is  usual  for  modern  utilities  to  employ  network  management  techniques  for  administering 
the  telecommunications  network.  A  centrally-located  management  centre  collects  traffic 
and  transmission  quality  and  failure  data  remotely  and  is  capable  of  making  software 
changes. to  accomplish  the  most  reliable  routing  of  traffic. 


3.2.11      Power  supplies 

To  support  the  aforementioned  telecommunication  services,  power  supplies  are  required 
which  should  be  engineered  to  match  the  desired  security  and  reliability.  Thus  all  supplies 
should  be  backed  by  electrical  storage,  for  example  batteries,  so  that  the  supply  continues 
to  be  available  during  power  system  failures. 


3.3      Summary 

An  electrical  utility  may  elect  to  provide  its  own  entire  telecommunication  services  or  a 
portion  of  them  for  the  following  reasons: 

i)     The  essential  service  provided  by  an  electrical  utility  requires  integrity  and  avail- 
ability of  communication  better  than  a  PTT  could  normally  offer. 

ii)    A  public  telecommunications  operator  may   not   be   prepared  to   provide   all  1he 
facilities  required  in  a  cost  effective  way. 

Regardless  of  whether  or  not  the  electrical  utility  or  the  PTT  provides  the  service,  isolation 
problems  and  general  electro-magnetic  compatibility  (EMC)  at  substations  and  power 
stations  should  be  taken  care  of  in  providing  safe,  secure  and  reliable  service. 


4     Service  requtrements 

4.1      Telecommunication  and  operational  services 

4.1.1      Administrative  telephony 

In  common  with  all  industrial  and  commercial  organizations  an  electrical  public  utility 
needs  a  suitable  service  of  telephony.  However,  the  requirements  tor  such  a  service  are 
more  demanding  than  for  many  other  organisations  because  the  telephony  facilities  may 
strongly  influence  1he  image  of  the  utility  to  the  electricity  supply  users. 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1035    (1992) 

Administrative  telephony  should  be  able  to  service  complaints  from  the  public,  demand  for 
electrical  supply  from  the  public,  as  well  as  work  organization,  fuel  provision  and  fuel 
movement  within  the  organization. 


4.1.2     Operational  telephony 

Due  to  the  importance  of  the  voice  communication  needs  of  staff  in  charge  of  generation, 
transmission  and  distribution  of  electrical  power,  there  is  a  need  for  an  operational  tele- 
phony service. 

In  an  electrical  utility  operational  telephony  is  the  most  important  working  tool.  Together 
with  telecontrol,  it  is  used  for  managing  and  supervising  the  power  network  but  operational 
telephony  has  to  be  available  even  when  the  telecontrol  system  fails. 


The  traffic  offered  by  the  operators  is  not  high;  nevertheless  operational  telephony 
requires  features  that  cannot  be  provided  except  by  means  of  specially  dedicated 
networks. 

In  addition  to  the  very  high  reliability  and  availability  required,  an  operational  telephone 
network  shall  provide  the  following  facilities: 

very  rapid  access; 

priority  subscribers,  with  call  intrusion  and  forcing  down  ("knock-down")  facilities; 

conference  facilities; 

alternative  routing -Of  calls; 

automatic  re-routing  of  calls; 

hunting  for  free  trunks  in  groups; 

non-blocking  transit  switching; 

closed  numbering  scheme; 

-      barring  certain  extensions  from  calling  subscribers  outside  predetermined  exchange 
areas. 

It  is  also  desirable  to  have  indication  of  the  origin  of  the  incoming  call. 

In  order  to  provide  the  above  facilities,  the  operational  telephone  network  should  be  based 
on  special  exchanges  with  a  more  sophisticated  signalling  system  than  usual. 


A  priority  call,  for  example,  has  to  be  able  to  transfer  the  information  about  the  priority 
throughout  the  network  by  means  of  a  signalling  system  which  enables  the  exchanges  to 
perform  in  the  manner  required  for  this  type  of  call,  i.e.  intrude  on  and/or  disconnect  a 
telephone  conversation  of  lower  status  if  free  trunks  or  a  subscriber  cannot  be  found. 


Similarly,  feaiures  such  as  conference  and  re-routing  of  calls  require  the  transfer  of 
suitable  information  about  the  type  and  status  of  calls  and  of  the  trunk  channels  intercon- 
necting the  transit  exchanges.  Such  features  should  be  provided  either  for  analogue  or 
digital  interconnection  channels  whether  only  a  single  channel  is  used  or  many  channels. 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 

As  the  calls  in  an  operational  network  may  be  of  an  extremely  urgent  nature,  the  signalling 
system  is  required  to  be  very  fast  and  reliable,  so  that  the  time  spent  in  setting  up  the  call 
is  kept  to  a  minimum. 

The  attraction  of  a  closed  numbering  scheme  is  that  to  reach  a  certain  subscriber  the 
same  number  is  dialled  irrespective  of  from  which  exchange  within  the  network  the  call  is 
placed. 

To  operate  a  network-wide  closed  numbering  scheme  and  automatic  alternative  re-routing 
requires  digital  store  and  fonward  facilities  and  stored  programme  control  (SPC)  of  the 
exchanges. 

Operational  staff  at  control  centres  should  have  the  capability  of  maximum  priority  and 
intrusion  ability  to  produce  a  grade  of  service  of  100  %  {i.e.  availability  of  100  %}  with  zero 
(or  minimum)  waiting  time. 


In  order  to  ease  the  operation  and  speed  up  the  calling  procedures,  such  staff  should  be 
provided  with  equipment  enabling  calls  to  be  set  up  to  the  required  destination  by  simply 
pressing  a  key  or  button  (one  key  or  button)  per  destination. 


The  fulfilment  of  the  above  functional  requirements  can  be  easily  accomplished  by  using 
dedicated  meshed  networks,  which  are  the  most  suitable  solution  for  medium  and  large 
size  power  networks.  In  such  cases  the  operational  telephone  network  can  also  be 
profitably  used  for  internal  administrative  communications,  at  least  as  a  back-up  system. 


For  smaller  networks  with  low  traffic  density  or  as  a  back-up  facility  to  the  dispatching  and 
control  operators,  party  line  systems  may  be  a  suitable  alternative. 


It  is  clear  from  the  foregoing  that  the  transit  exchanges  and  the  other  equipment  used  in 
the  operational  telephone  networks  of  electrical  utilities  have  to  be  quite  special  and 
different  from  those  used  in  public  networks. 

4.1.3     Telecontrol 

Telecontrol  at  its  most  basic  concept  means  controlling  a  power  station  or  substation 
remotely  just  as  if  the  operator  was  actually  at  the  station.  One  of  the  benefits  is  a  notice- 
able saving  in  manpower  since  one  operator  can  control  several  stations,  thus  reducing 
operating  costs. 

Telecontrol  provides  for  data  acquisition  from  the  remote  stations  towards  the  control  cen- 
tre and  in  the  reverse  direction  commands  from  the  control  centre  to  the  remote  stations. 


Telecontrol  does  not  however  mean  only  telecommand  for  changing  the  state  of  circuit 
breakers  and  isolators  (disconnectors),  or  setting  some  of  the  operational  conditions  of 
some  of  the  equipment.  It  also  means  supervision  of  the  overall  state  of  the  electrical 
network  as  a  unique  process  to  ensure  its  security,  reliability,  availability,  and  economy  in 
electrical  energy  provision.  To  be  effective,  this  requires  the  telecontrol  system  to  carry 
out  the  functions  of  state  estimation,  detection  of  bad  power  system  data,  etc. 


IS   14392:1996 
lEC  10B5    (1992) 

The  power  system  functions  that  a  telecontrol  system  has  to  satisfy  are  listed  irl  the  follow- 
ing table  1.  The  consequent  operational  functions  to  achieve  these  are  summarised  in 
table  2.  The  term  energy  management  system  (EMS)  is  frequently  used  to  embrace  all 
such  aspects. 

Except  in  very  small  electrical  networks,  the  telecontrol  functions  are  usually  organised  in 
an  hierarchical  structure,  as  shown  in  figure  9. 


At  the  highest  level  a  telecontrol  system  can  consist  of  a  number  of  interconnected  control 
centres  serviced  preferably  by  a  common  meshed  telecommunication  network.  The  tele- 
control system  may  span  more  than  one  power  administrative  region  at  control  centres 
and  thus  the  authority  over  the  telecontrol  system  itself  does  not  necessarily  coincide  with 
any  particular  power  system  authority. 


In  most  cases  the  main  control  centre  (MCC)  will  not  execute  commands  in  real  time  via 
the  telecontrol  system  but  operates  via  the  lower  level  centres  by  telephone  instruction. 
Nevertheless,  the  main  control  centre  will  provide  overall  supervision  of  the  total  system 
and  may  well  schedule  the  operation  of  the  power  stations. 

At  the  level  of  Regional  Control  Centre  (RCC)  actual  LFC  operations  as  well  as  execution 
of  commands  may  be  performed.  The  RCC  is  also  responsible  for  the  next  lower  level  of 
operation  {District  Control  Centres),  that  execute  commands  after  instruction  by  or  agree- 
ment with  their  RCC. 


The  security,  reliability  and  availability  of  the  electrical  power  system  requires  that  the  tele- 
control functions  are  fast  even  in  updating  the  telemeasurements  and  should  be  of  the 
highest  security  and  reliability.  Consistency  of  information  between  the  measurements  and 
status  information  is  essential  for  satisfactory  operation,  especially  in  times  of  power 
system  faults.  Response  times  should  be  short  particularly  during  power  system  faults 
when  the  amount  of  information  to  be  returned  will  be  very  large. 


Security  Is  the  probability  that  unwanted  or  incorrect  commands  do  not  occur,  while  reliab- 
ility is  the  probability  that  a  command  is  not  missed  and  is  correctly  executed.  Similarly  the 
telemetering  functions  have  to  be  highly  reliable,  secure  and  accurate. 


All  of  the  foregoing  result  In  the  following  requirements: 

fast  and  predictable  response  times; 

use  of  suitable  transmission  protocols  and  coding  for  operational  data  transmission; 

high  quality  communication  media; 

high  reliability  communication  network; 

high  availability  communication  networks  both  long  term  (equipment  failure)  and 
short  term  (noise,  propagation,  interferences). 


10 


IS  14392  :  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

The  transmission  capacity  of  the  communication  links  should  match  the  need  to  keep  the 
overall  response  times  small  consistent  with  providing  the  right  amount  of  error  protection. 
Modern  power  system  operation  requires  that  the  updating  time  of  the  information 
reaching  the  MCC  Is  less  than  a  few  seconds.  Taking  into  account  the  amount  of  infor- 
mation coming  from  the  remote  stations,  the  data  throughput  can  be  typically  200  bits/s 
to  2  400  bits/s  between  outstatlons  and  DCC,  typically  2  400  bits/s  to  9  600  bits/s  between 
DCC  and  RCC.  and  typically  9  600  bits/s  to  48  000  bits/s  between  RCC  and  MCC. 


The  data  throughput  figures  are  likely  to  increase  with  the  introduction  of  the  next  genera- 
tion of  telecontrol  systems  which  tend  to  require  much  shorter  response  times  and  higher 
throughputs  in  order  to  enhance  the  automatic  computer-based  system  control  functions 
and  thus  improve  the  security,  reliability  and  availability  of  the  service  provided  by  the 
utility. 


Significant  developments  in  the  use  of  expert  systems  at  the  different  levels  of  telecontrol 
systems  are  currently  underway.  Among  other  things,  these  may  lead  to  a  potential 
reduction  in  the  quantities  of  a  real-time  data  transmitted  as  a  result  of  local  automatic 
alarm  analysis  in  the  event  of  a  sudden  increase  in  data. 


The  overall  target  availability  for  the  telecommunication  links  of  the  primary  network  (RCC 
to  f^CC)  should  be  better  than  99,99  %,  whereas  lower  values  may  be  tolerated  in  the 
secondary  networks  where  the  avaitability  should  be  better  than  99,9  %. 


Regarding  the  telecommunication  network  configuration,  the  required  long-term  availability 
imposes  a  need  for  redundant  routing  of  signals  on  fully  independent  paths.  This  can 
readily  be  achieved  by  mesh  configuriations. 


Redundant  routing  itself  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  the  required  availability  in  the  short 
term  if  there  are  any  common  mode  failures  that  can  affect  both  paths.  Full  redundancy 
means  separate  entries  into  a  building  from  separate  routes. 


Notwithstanding  such  separation,  each  communication  path  should  be  of  sufficiently  high 
quality  and  high  availability  to  achieve  the  required  availability  in  the  short  term  when  one 
of  the  paths  is  out  of  service, 

A  further  consideration  is  the  need  for  flexibility  should  a  DCC,  RCC  or  even  an  MCC  fail. 


11 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Table  1  -  Power  system  functions 

(to  be  satisfied  by  telecontrol) 


Network  state  determination 


Topology  determination  and  state  estimation. 
Network  equivalence. 


Network  analysis 


Load  flow  calculations. 
Short-circuit  calculations. 
Contingency  evaluation. 
Security  monitoring. 


Thermal  power  production 


Trend  monitoring.  Set  value 
Operation  reports/production. 


Hydro  power  production 


Calculation  of  water  flow. 

Supervision  of  legal  obligations  (levels,  flows,  etc.). 

Trend  monitoring. 

Set  value. 

Control  signals  to  local  regulating  equipment. 

Operation  reports/production. 


Network  and  generation  control 


Load  shedding. 

Load-frequency  control  and  economic  energy  management. 

Load  forecast. 
Unit  commitment. 


Specific  telecontrol  system  functions 


Non-current  tagging  of  measurands.* 
Non-current  tagging  of  monitored  information.* 


Post  mortem  analysis 


Statistical  value  processing 


Preparation  of  statistical  reports 


Post  mortem  review. 

Reports  of  power  system  disturbances  for  immediate 

disturbance  analysis. 

Reports  of  power  system  disturbances  for  subsequent 

disturbance  analysis. 


General. 

Statistical  value  generation. 

Storage  of  statistics. 

Checking  of  statistical  data. 

Correction/complementing. 


General 

Operation  reports,  power  grids. 

Load  prediction  (long  term). 


Training 


Training  simulator. 


*   I.E.  indication  that  measurands  and/or  monitored  information  are  not  being  updated,  and  hence  are 
"non-current". 


12 


IS  14392 :  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Table  2  -  Telecontrol  functiorrs 


Telemetering 

Acquisition  of  variable  quantities. 
Scaling  to  engineering  units. 
Calculation  of  composite  values. 
Override  marking. 
Manual  input  values. 

Teleindication 

Acquisition  of  state  information  and  signals. 

Time  tagging  of  data 
Calculation  of  composite  values. 
Override  marking  of  indications. 
Manual  inputting  of  indications. 

Telecounting 

Acquisition  of  integrated  variable  states. 
Scaling  to  engineering  units 
Override  marking 
Manual  inputting 

Telecommand 
Teleswhching 

Issuing  of  commands  for  cfiange  of  state 
(discrete) 

Teleregulation 
Telereadjusting 

Issuing  of  regulation  information  (variable). 
Blocking 

Monitoring  of  limits 

Monitoring  of  telemetered  quantities  against  limits. 
Monrtoring  of  telemetered  quantities  against  forbidden  zones. 
Inputting  of  limit  values. 

Event  processing  and  alarming 

Classification  of  events  in  the  power  system. 

Alarm  acknowledgment. 
Alarm  clearance. 
Alarm  blocking 
Alarm  delaying 

4. 1 .4     Load  management 

To  Improve  the  system  load  characteristic  electrical  utilities  with  large  power  networks 
sometimes  otter  enhanced  tariffs  to  consumers  who  are  prepared  to  restrict  their  load 
demands  at  certain  times  of  the  day.  e.g.  off-peak  power. 


This  gives  rise  to  a  requirement  tor  the  remote  control  of  tariff  meters  and  the  switching  of 
non-essential  supplies  like  water  heating  loads.  This  facility  requires  relatively  few 
commands  at  infrequent  intervals,  although  there  may  be  a  very  lar^e  number  of  terminal 
receivers  spread  over  wide  geographic  areas  and  high  reliability  is  needed  If  security  is 
involved.  In  addition,  this  signalling  is  usually  only  required  rn  the  outwards  direction,  as 
there  are  no  reveftive  or  check-back  signals  in  the  reverse  direction. 


As  a  separate  issue,  load  control  and  switching  may  be  essential  when  particular 
situations  require  load  relief  in  order  to  avoid  non-secure  electrical  network  operation  or 
black-outs. 


13 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  lOaS    (1992) 

Load  management  is  most  effective  with  the  biggest  medium  voltage  (MV)  or  high  voltage 
(HV)  users,  who  offer  the  largest  loads.  The  techniques  first  applied  for  load  management 
employed  superimposifion  of  low  level  audio  frequencies  on  the  network  power  frequency 
and  this  is  known  as  ripple  control  and  is  still  in  use.  Today  it  is  recognised  that  the  load 
control  schemes  are  an  integral  part  of  the  much  larger  overall  telecontrol  and  telecommu- 
nication problem  and  other  techniques  using  normal  telecommunication  media  are  used 
for  the  effective  load  management  when  it  involves  high-toad  users  and  conditions  of 
shortage  of  power  are  possible. 


In  the  case  of  targe  power  users  it  may  be  desirable  to  implement  systems  allowing 
transmission  In  both  directions  that  permit  return  of  remote  meter  reading  operations  as 
well  as  other  customer  data  such  as  number  and  duration  of  power  supply  failures. 


In  recent  years  increasing  interest  has  been  shown  in  the  provision  of  load  management 
systems  using  radio  telecommunication  techniques,  resorting  to  broadcasting  radio  system 
for  one-way  operation  or  to  private  or  dedicated  networks  in  the  case  of  two-way  systems. 


4.1.5     Teleprotection 

Of  necessity  teleprotection  is  treated  in  a  different  way  to  the  telecontrol  function.  This  is 
because  teleprotection  requires  communication  between  points  on  a  power  network, 
whereas  telecontrol  requires  communication  radially  from  the  control  centre. 


Teleprotection  enables  discriminative  or  coordinated  operation  of  the  electrical  protection 
installed  atihe  terminal  points  of  an  electrical  power  line,  and  this  requires  a  communica- 
tion link  between  the  two  terminal  stations  of  a  line. 


Teleprotection  systems  can  be  classified  into  two  categories  according  to  the  type  of 
information  that  is  transmitted: 

-     analogue  comparison  systems; 
command  systems. 

Analogue  comparison  protection  systems  compare  the  amplitude  and  a  phase  of  the 
electrical  power  system  currents  at  each  end  of  a  line.  The  analogue  signals  are 
processed  at  each  end  of  the  power  line  and  sre  compared  with  the  local  values  to 
determine  if  there  is  a  fault  which  is  internal  or  external  to  the  line  section. 

In  command  systems  the  information  transmitted  between  the  ends  of  a  protected  line 
consists  of  a  change  of  state,  OFF-ON  or  vice  versa.  There  are  three  basic  methods  of 
using  simple  command  signals  in  a  protection  system,  namely  to  give  a  command  "to  trip" 
(intertripping  scheme);  to  give  an  advisory  command  that  permits  tripping  (permissive  trip 
scheme);  or  to  give  a  command  to  prevent  tripping  {blocking  protection  scheme). 


14 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1092) 

In  the  intertripping  mode  the  command  can  be  used  at  the  receiving  end  to  effect  the 
tripping  without  taking  into  account  the  local  protection  status  (this  is  also  known  as  direct 
or  transfer  tripping);  in  the  permissive  mode  the  command  can  take  effect  only  if  the  local 
protection  lias  operated.  In  the  blocking  mode  the  action  is  to  prevent  operation  of  the 
protection  equipment  for  an  external  fault. 


In  each  case  command  systems  require  that  the  teleprotection  is  fast,  dependable  and 
secure.  However,  these  parameters  are  Inter-dependent,  (for  a  given  bandwidth)  and  one 
can  only  be  improved  at  the  expense  of  the  other(s).  The  requirements  differ  according  to 
the  type  of  system  In  use. 


For  a  defined  dependability  and  signal  to  noise  ratio  (S/N)  in  the  transmission  path,  the 
maximum  teleprotection  transmission  time  for  command  systems,  excluding  propagation 
time,  should  be: 

-  less  than  20  ms  for  blocking  systems; 

-  less  than  40  ms  for  permissive  tripping  systems; 

-  less  than  60  ms  for  intertripping  systems. 

Note  that  power  system  stability  and  security  considerations  may  require  transmission 
times  considerably  less  than  the  above,  e.g.  20  ms  for  intertripping. 


Dependability  is  the  probability  that  the  command  is  correctly  received.  It  is  given  by 
1-Pmc,  where  Pmc  is  the  probability  of  a  missing  command.  For  the  transmission  times 
given  above  and  a  defined  S/N  ratio,  the  probability  (Pmc)  of  a  missing  command  should 
be: 

-  less  than  1 0"^  for  blocking  systems; 

-  less  than  10"^  to  10'^  for  permissive  tripping  systems; 

-  less  than  10"^  to  10""^  for  intertripping  systems. 

Security  is  the  probability  that  unwanted  or  incorrect  commands  do  not  occur.  It  is  given 
by  1-Puc,  where  Puc  is  the  probability  of  an  unwanted  command.  For  the  transmission 
times  given  above  and  a  defined  S/N  ratio,  the  probability  (Puc)  of  an  unwanted  command 
should  be: 

-  less  than  10"^  to  10"^  for  blocking  systems; 

-  less  than  1 0~^  to  10"^  for  permissive  tripping  systems; 

-  less  than  1 0"^  to  1 0"^  for  Intertripping  systems. 

The  transmission  of  a  protection  command  over  an  analogue  transmission  medium  usually 
requires  a  channel  bandwidth  between  120  Hz  and  480  Hz,  but  not  exceeding  4  kHz. 


Analogue  comparison  protection  systems,  on  the  other  hand,  require  a  security  ^nd 
dependability  as  high  or  higher  than  for  the  command  systems,  but  require  also  good 
fidelity  in  the  transmission  of  the  analogue  waveform.  Moreover  it  is  necessary  that  the 
communication  channel  should  not  distort  the  variations  of  the  transmitted  waveform.  The 


15 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

transmission  channel,  therefore,  is  usually  wider  than  for  command  protection  systems 
and  requires  a  whole  4  kHz  channel  in  analogue  transmission  media  and  a  bit  rate 
of  19,2  kbits/s  to  64  kbits/s  or  better  In  digital  transmission  media. 


The  operating  time  of  an  analogue  comparison  protection  system  is  the  time  from  the 
instant  of  fault  inception  to  operation  of  the  tripping  output  contact.  This  will  be  generally 
less  than  60  ms  although  system  stability  and  security  considerations  may  require 
operating  times  considerably  less  than  the  above,  e.g.  less  than  25  ms.  In  general  the 
operating  time  will  be  increased  by  noise.  The  teleprotection  transmission  time,  excluding 
propagation  time,  is  normally  kept  small,  e.g.  less  than  5  ms. 


4.1.6     Mobile  radio 

Mobile  radio  provides  a  unique  means  of  communication  with  personnel  in  the  field  for  the 
operation,  fault  clearance,  repair  and  construction  of  electricity  networks  and  for  the 
provision  of  an  efficient  consumer  service.  Its  use  contributes  to  the  high  reliability  of  the 
public  electricity  supply  which  is  achieved  today  and  it  is  indispensable  for  maintaining  the 
availability  of  the  supply. 


There  is  no  alternative  to  mobile  radio  for  dispatching  maintenance  teams  at  very  short 
notice  and  for  coordinating  their  activities.  Without  mobile  radio  the  outages  on  the  elec- 
trical network  would  be  two  or  three  times  longer  in  duration. 


The  traffic  offered  by  the  users  of  mobile  radio  networks  of  electric  power  companies  is 
normally  no  higher  than  that  offered  by  users  of  other  private  mobile  radio  networks  of 
commercial  or  industrial  companies.  However,  the  traffic  offered  becomes  much  greater  in 
emergency  situations,  such  as  during  bad  weather  conditions  (heavy  rain,  snow,  wind, 
hurricanes,  etc.)  when  failures  and  outages  of  the  electrical  power  lines  are  more  likely  to 
occur.  The  dimensioning  of  the  mobile  radio  networks  has  to  be  designed  taking  into 
account  such  conditions,  so  that  the  networks  do  not  become  overloaded  or  saturated  just 
when  they  are  most  needed. 


For  large  electric  power  system  operation  the  following  types  of  mobile  communications 
are  desirable; 

a)  person  to  person  or  mobile  to  mobile  communications  for  short  ranges  (few  kilome- 
tres) e.g.  during  line  construction  or  line  survey; 

b)  local  area  communications,  base-mobile  and/or  mobile-mobile  for  ranges  of  a  few 
tens  of  kilometres,  such  as  the  coverage  of  urban  and  suburban  areas  (the  coverage 
might  be  achieved  by  a  single  base  station  or  by  a  suitable  repeater  station); 


16 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

c)  wide  area  communications,  base-mobile  and/or  mobile-mobile  for  ranges  of  many 
tens  of  kilometers  in  areas  that  require  many  base  or  repeater  stations  for  the  territory 
to  be  covered.  Cellular  mobile  radio  networks  can  often  be  used  for  wide  area  communi- 
cation. 

Type  a)  can  utilise  frequencies  different  from  type  b)  in  order  to  relieve  the  frequency 
congestion,  e.g.  UHF  and  VHF.  Type  c)  normally  requires  microwave  radio  networks  for 
connection  between  the  base  and  repeater  stations. 


Such  types  of  networks  are  very  convenient  permitting  staff  savings  and  operational  coor- 
dination in  an  area  corresponding  to  that  telecontrolted  by  District  Control  Centres. 


Given  the  traffic  to  be  served  and  the  shortage  of  suitable  frequencies  that  occurs  in  most 
countries,  It  is  very  convenient  to  resort  to  networks  of  the  cellular  type,  with  cells  of 
different  sizes  depending  on  the  traffic  density  and  on  other  technical  considerations.  In 
each  cell  a  number  of  trunked  channels  are  available  for  the  users. 


Another  technique  that  can  profitably  be  used,  even  with  trunking,  is  the  simultaneous 
broadcasting  of  which  there  are  two  types:  synchronised  carrier  and  quasi-synchronised 
carrier. 

Most  mobile  communication  networks  provide  voice  communications  and  much  of  the  time 
the  service  requires  conferencing  facilities  and  interconnection  with  the  operational 
telephone  network. 

Conferencing  is  essential  in  emergency  conditions  for  the  coordination  of  the  many  teams 
that  are  required  to  operate  simultaneously. 

In  addition  to  voice  use,  the  operation  of  electrical  networks  toxJay  requires  data  transmis- 
sion from  or  to  mobile  stations.  The  need  is  for  coded  messages,  that  can  contribute  to 
relief  of  the  traffic  on  the  networks  by  reducing  ihe  need  for  voice  communication.  The 
transmission  of  written  messages  is  increasingly  required  in  order  to  save  time  when 
written  Instructions  or  authorisations  are  to  be  exchanged  for  operations. 


Once  the  mobile  station  is  equipped  for  data  transmission  it  is  evident  that  the  possibility 
exists  of  using  mobile  networks  for  telecontrol.  As  a  matter  of  fact  this  is  a  facility  that  is 
often  required,  mainly  in  connection  with  MV  electrical  networks.  Such  a  feature  is  very 
attractive,  because  it  allows  extension  of  the  telecontrol  networks  without  requiring  expen- 
sive dedicated  communication  networks.  Nevertheless  data  transmission  over  a  mobile 
network  requires  that  quality,  reliability,  availability,  dependability  and  security  standards 
should  be  similar  to  those  achieved  in  fixed  telecommunication  networks. 


The  telecontrol  and  data  transmission  applications  should  not  offer  traffic  values  that 
impair  voice  communication,  and  they  should  be  confined  to  services  not  requiring  a 
permanent  channel  and  offering  very  low  traffic. 


17 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

4.1.7      Computing  traffic 

For  handling  computing  traffic  either  dedicated  circuits  or  packet  switched  services  are 
required. 

Dedicated  circuits  are  advisable  where  line  utilisation  is  very  high  although  they  do  not 
permit  ready  access  to  alternative  routes  if  the  direct  route  fails  nor  is  routing  to  more  than 
one  address  very  efficient. 


Packet  switching  Is  particularly  suited  to  larger  data  networks  where  the  main  data  routes 
can  be  trunked  and  where  multi-access  use  is  required  for  relatively  low  data  throughput 
by  the  user. 


4. 1 .8     Other  Services 

Teleprinting,  facsimile,  and  electronic  mail 

In  addition  to  the  telephone  network  and  the  facilities  for  overall  system  control,  electrical 
utilities  also  need  teleprinting  and  facsimile  facilities,  not  only  for  general  and  administra- 
tive services,  but  as  an  important  aid  to  the  operation  of  the  electrical  network. 


Teleprinters  are  normally  operated  as  simple  point-to-point  links,  so  that  they  are  continu- 
ously available  to  the  users.  Nevertheless  in  very  l>ig  networks,  where  a  large  number  of 
users  have  to  communicate  with  one  another  the  teleprinting  system  can  make  use  of 
message  switching  exchanges,  like  a  telephone  network,  even  though  direct  circuits  are 
always  reserved  for  the  main  network  nodes  and  control  centres. 


Teleprinting  Is  required  for  transmitting  important  information  associated  with  operations, 
e.g.  instructions  for  and  confirmation  of  extraordinary  switching  states  under  emergency 
conditions,  or  in  connection  with  maintenance  and  repairs  on  the  electrical  network. 


For  teleprinting,  dedicated  channels  are  normally  used,  with  bit  rates  between  50  bits/s 
and  4  800  bits/s.  The  higher  bit  rates  are  reserved  for  the  more  evolutionary  teletex 
applications. 

Facsimile  is  more  and  more  widely  used  by  reason  of  its  immediacy  for  the  transmission  of 
document  copies,  drawings  and  graphics  and  utilises  the  telephone  network  and  telephone 
extensions. 

If  facsimile  is  used  directly  for  operations  the  operational  telephone  system  is  generally 
used  as  the  communication  media.  If  facsimile  is  required  for  administrative  purposes  the 
operational  telephone  system  may  also  be  used,  if  permitted  by  the  PTT,  otherwise  the 
public  telephone  network  is  used. 


Electronic  mail,  whrch  is  based  on  the  storage  and  forwarding  of  messages,  may  also  be 
used  in  place  of  or  as  well  as  teleprinting  for  administration  traffic.  With  electronic  mail  a 
"mail-box"  is  used  requiring  the  recipient  to  access  his  own  mail-box  to  read  messages 
destined  for  him.  Electronic  mail  makes  use  of  VDU  terminals. 

18 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


4.2     Electro-magnetic  compatibility  (EMC) 


The  first  problem  that  arises  when  dealing  with  telecommunication  links  having  at  least 
one  of  its  ends  terminated  In  an  electrical  station  is  the  rise  in  the  earth  potential  as  a 
result"  of  a  conductor  of  an  electrical  HV  circuit  or  a  station  busbar  being  temporarily 
connected  to  earth  (short  circuit  fault).  For  a  few  tens  of  milliseconds,  until  the  fault  Is 
disconnected  by  operation  of  a  circuit  breal(er(s),  the  potential  of  the  local  earth  can  be 
very  different  from  the  potential  of  the  remote  earth.  If  a  metallic  telecommunication  circuit 
is  used  which  connects  the  station  with  another  site  it  will  be  subjected  to  a  common-mode 
voltage  that  is  applied  to  the  input/output  of  the  terminal  equipment  ^nd  can  cause 
damage  to  the  equipment  and/or  danger  to  personnel. 


Moreover,  due  to  unbalance  in  the  telecommunication  circuit  the  common  mode  voltages 
can  result  in  differential  mode  voltages  which  can  cause  serious  damage  to  telecom- 
inunication  equipment. 

The  second  problem  Is  that  of  overvoltage  due  to  lightning  and  other  electrical  discharges 
when  opening  circuit  breakers  and  isolators.  Lightning  can  reach  the  telecommunication 
equipment  via  power  supplies,  communication  circuits,  and  aerial  towers.  Lightning  can 
also  raise  the  local  earth  potential  causing  impulsive  voltages  at  the  input/output  of 
telecommunication  equipment. 


Further  problems  can  arise  from  induction  due  to  the  passage  of  load  or  fault  currents  in 
electrical  power  lines  and  station  busbars. 


In  facing  all  the  above  problems,  which  are  typical  for  equipment  installed  In  electrical 
plants,  power  stations  and  substations,  it  is  necessary  to  make  use  of  equipment  that 
ensures  both  damage  limitation  (I.e.  the  capability  of  the  equipment  not  to  be  damaged) 
and  immunity  (i.e.  the  capability  to  perform  its  operational  characteristics  without  any 
disturbance).  Furthermore,  no  radiation  or  other  disturbances  should  be  emitted  which 
could  disturb  other  equipment. 


Depending  on  the  site  and  on  the  electrical  environment,  some  or  all  of  the  following 
requirements  shall  be  taken  into  account  (but  see  the  relevant  lEC  documents  and/or 
publications  for  details): 

-  minimum  insulation  resistance  to  earth  (10  MQ  to  100  M£2); 

-  electrical  Insulation  withstand  (1  kV  to  2  kV,  a.c.  or  1  kV  to  3  kV,  d.c.)  for  1  min; 

-  impulse  withstand  (1  kV  to  5  kV;  1 ,2/50  ^ls;  higher  values  may  also  apply  in  certain 
circumstances,  e.g.  6  kV  or  more,  0,1/2  000  jis); 


immunity  to  current  impulses  (up  to  500  A;  8/20  ^s); 
immunity  to  voltage  impulses  (2  kV;  10/700  m^s); 
immunity  to  short  supply  Interruptions  (10  ms  to  500  ms): 
immunity  to  distorted  a.c.  power  supply  voltage  (up  to  15  %); 


19 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

-  immunity  to  residual  ax.  on  d.c.  power  supply  (0,2  Vpp  to  15  Vpp;  100  Hz); 

-  immunity  to  a.c.  and  d.c.  voltages  (10  V  to  250  V)  on  signal  inputs  (metallic); 

-  immunity  to  trains  of  sinusoidal  oscillations  on  supply  inputs  (20  ms;  0,01  MHz 
to1  MHz;  10  V  to  100  V); 

-  immunity  to  damped  sinusoidal  oscillations  on  signal  inputs  (0,1  MHz  to  1  MHz; 
0,2kVto2,5kV); 

-  immunity  to  static  energy  discharge  (5/30  ns;  2  kV  to  15  kV); 

-  immunity  to  50  Hz  magnetic  field  (1  s;  0,1  kA/m  to  1  kA/m); 

-  Immunity  to  impulsive  magnetic  field  (8/20  jis;  0,1  kA  to  1  kA); 

-  immunity  to  damped  magnetic  field  (0,1  MHz  to  1  MHz;  10  A/m  to  100  A/m); 

-  immunity  to  radiated  electromagnetic  field  (continuous  and  modulated  field,  10  V/m 
or  more  within  the  frequency  range  100  kHz  to  1  X3Hz).  For  example,  from  a  hand-held 
"walkie-talkie"; 

-  immunity  from  switching  transients  up  to  300  V/m. 

Apart  from  d.c.  supply  Inputs  and  RF  connections  to  antennae,  it  is  desirable  that  all  the 
other  inputs/outputs  be  balanced  and  insulated  from  ground. 

When  circuit  breakers  or  isolators  open,  they  generate  electrical  discharges  producing 
very  high  noise  levels  In  the  telecommunication  circuits.  The  noise  power  can  easily 
exceed  the  level  of  signals  transmitted  by  power  line  carrier  systems,  so  that  during  the 
discharges  transmission  may  be  lost,  unless  very  careful  signal  processing  is  applied. 


Electrical  discharges  also  generate  radiation  of  electromagnetic  waves  having  quite  a 
broad  spectrum.  Among  the  causes  of  electromagnetic  radiated  noise  are 
micro-discharges  on  faulty  insulators  or  Insulators  with  dirty  surfaces  or  in  other  electrical 
devices. 

All  these  circumstances  mean  that  careful  attention  has  to  be  observed  when  operating 
radio-receivers  working  at  LF,  MF,  HF  and  the  low  bands  of  VHF  by  ensuring  that  the 
received  field  values  are  higher  than  usual  practice.  At  160  MHz,  for  example,  noise  figure 
impairments  of  some  decibels  have  been  measured  in  the  areas  occupied  by  electrical 
stations.  These  impairments,  which  have  a  power  spectrum  density  decreasing  with 
frequency,  can  be  neglected  for  UHF  and  microwaves. 


4.3     Other  requirements 

In  the  foregoing  subclauses  we  have  seen  that  electric  power  systems  need  telecommuni- 
cation networks  that  are  very  reliable  and  always  available.  Reliability  and  availability 
cannot  be  ensured  simply  by  providing  alternative  signal  routing  and  path  redundancy. 
They  require  also  high  reliability  and  availability  on  each  path,  so  that  the  dependability 
required  by  the  sjervices  is  ensured  even  in  the  case  of  failure  of  one  of  the  paths.  More- 
over, if  the  transmission  performance  of  each  path  is  not  good  enough  the  signal  received 
at  each  end  of  a  link,  obtained  by  selection  or  combination,  may  be  affected  by  phase  jitter 
that  can  considerably  impair  data  transmission  and  telecontrol. 


20 


IS   14392:  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

Another  requirement  concerns  response  times.  The  response  times  should  be  short  and 
stable.  Attention  should  also  be  paid  to  timing  and  synchronisation  problems  when  digital 
transmission  systems  are  used. 

Telecommunication  networks  for  power  systems  also  have  to  be  flexible.  The  many 
changes  required  as  the  power  network  parameters  and  configuration  alter  make  it  desir- 
able that  the  telecommunication  network  be  capable  of  adapting  to  the  different  situations. 
Standardisation,  upwards  capability,  spare  bandwidth  and  spare  channels  are  some  of  the 
necessary  features  of  the  telecommunication  network. 


A  noticeable  improvement  to  the  network  flexibility  can  be  achieved  In  digital  networks  by 
resorting  to  programmable  and  teleprogrammable  multiplex  equipment  capable  of  switch- 
ing their  channel  input/outputs  to  different  time-slots.  Also  programmable  drop-Insert  and 
branching  equipment  should  be  employed  for  similar  reasons.  All  these  features  should  be 
provided  by  a  suitable  telecommunication  network  management  system. 


From  the  above  considerations  it  appears  that  electric  power  utilities  need  very  special 
telecommunication  networks,  having  characteristics  that  usually  cannot  be  provided  by 
public  networks,  as  these  are  designed  and  optimised  for  other  services  and  other  require- 
ments. In  fact,  for  the  very  demanding  operational  applications  of  generation  and  trans- 
mission, the  most  developed  electric  power  utilities  are  always  served  by  dedicated 
networks. 


If  one  considers  emergency  conditions  such  as  natural  disasters,  floods,  blizzards  or  earth- 
quakes requiring  the  maintenance  and  rapid  restoration  of  public  electricity  supply,  an 
electric  utility  cannot  relay  on  systems  shared  with  other  services  and  utilities  which  may 
themselves  be  overloaded  by  reason  of  the  same  emergency  conditions. 


It  has  already  been  said  that  just  as  telecommunication  networks  for  power  utilities  should 
be  designed  and  equipped  in  order  to  serve  the  Iraffic  foreseen  in  emergency  conditions, 
so  these  same  circumstances  shall  also  be  taken  Into  account  when  choosing  the  various 
transmission  media. 

As  an  example  it  is  evident  that  the  availability  of  a  PLC  channel  is  correlated  with  the 
availability  of  the  electrical  overhead  line  on  which  it  works,  so  that  PLC  should  t)nly  be 
used  on  peripheral  telecommunication  services,  as  it  may  not  be  the  best  choice  for  long 
range  communications,  requiring  many  sections  in  cascade.  Similarly,  where  the 
availability  has  to  be  independent  of  the  availability  of  electrical  overhead  lines,  PLC 
should  not  be  used. 


This  argument  is  applicable  also  to  telecommunication  systems  based  on  optical  fibre 
cables  supported  on  overhead  electrical  lines.  The  availability  of  a  optical  fibre  link 
depends  on  the  availability  and  mean  time  to  repair  (MTTR)  of  the  electrical  overhead 
lines  on  which  it  works. 


21 


IS  14392:1996 
(EC  1085    (1992) 

Thus  when  using  PLC  or  fibre-optics  on  power  lines  it  is  advisable  to  provide  redundancy 
of  different  paths  and  It  is  also  desirable  that  at  least  one  of  the  paths  be  provided  by  an 
alternative  media  such  as  radio  links. 


This  last  point  is  important  also  in  relation  to  economic  considerations.  In  tact  tt>e  capacity 
normally  required  for  electric  utilities  means  that  it  "may  be  cheaper  to  us^  radio  links, 
which  can  also  be  used  for  interconnecting  repeater  stations  to  provide  suitable  mobile 
radio  system  networks. 


A  further  point  concerns  the  power  supplies  required  by  the  telecommunication  services. 
Low  voltage  (e.g.  48  V  d.c.)  supplies  require  battery  back-up  of  normally  six  hours 
capacity.  Main  a.c.  supplies  will  require  uninterrupted  power  supplies  backed  up  by  diesel- 
alternators  with  fuel  tank  storage  of  many  days  capacity. 


All  these  considerations  make  it  imperative  to  use  the  services  of  professional  specialist 
support  in  designing  the  telecommunication  services  of  an  electrical  power  utility. 


5     Impact  on  telecommunication  provision 

5.1      Transmission  media 

This  subclause  is  not  intended  to  give  a  detailed  description  of  the  transmission  media 
available  for  use  by  an  electrical  power  utility  but  highlights  those  aspects  considered  to 
be  important.  The  international  standards  (lEC.  CCITT,  CCIR,  etc.)  give  all  the  detailed 
information  that  may  be  required. 


Figure  10  indicates  the  various  telecommunication  transmission  media  that  may  be 
available  to  the  user  for  conveying  information  from  one  point  to  another. 

There  are  several  criteria  that  have  to  be  observed  in  selecting  a  particular  transmission 
medium.  These  criteria  are: 

-  How  many  channels  are  required? 

-  What  is  the  required  transmission  capacity  for  each  channel? 

-  What  constraints  are  there?  For  example;  geographical,  regulatory,  distances, 
frequencies  available  for  use.  terrorist  activity,  power  supplies; 

•     What  are  the  required  reliability  and  quality  for  the  system? 

5.1.1     Pilot  cables  owned  by  the  utility 

Electrical  power  utilities  frequently  make  use  of  their  own  pilot  cable  for  protection  and 
telecommunication  services.  These  cables  are  usually  run  underground  in  cable  trenches 
and  are  frequently  laid  in  the  same  trenches  as  HV  cables.  Because  of  this,  great  care 
needs  to  be  taken  in  handling  pilot  cables  due  to  the  presence  of  induction  from  the 
HV  cables,  especially  when  there  is  a  power  system  fault. 


22 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

Care  also  needs  to  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  electrical  balance  of  the  cables  is  sufficient 
so  that  induction  from  HV  cables  does  not  make  the  communication  media  unusable. 


For  telecommunication  purpose,  cables  having  balanced,  twisted  pairs  should  be  used. 
These  cables  can  be  protected  by  such  devices  as  isolating  or  neutralising  transformers, 
with  non-linear  devices  (e.g.  carbon  blocks  or  gas  tubes)  to  limit  dangerous  voltages, 
although  the  use  of  these  on  circuits  used  for  teleprotection  may  be  undesirable  (see 
figure  11).  In  order  to  reduce  the  induced  voltage  the  cable  may  be  sectionalised  by  inter- 
mediate isolating  transformers.  The  attenuation  of  the  pilots  may  be  quite  high  and  usually 
only  audio  frequencies  up  to  say  4  kHz,  are  usable.  Hence  distances  over  which  such 
cables  may  be  used  without  amplification  may  be  limited  to  10  km  to  15  km. 


5. 1 .2     Ctrcuits  leased  from  PTT's 

Telecommunication  circuits  may  be  leased  from  the  PTT  for  an  annual  rental  charge  and 
an  initial  corrnection  fee.  Analogue  and  digital  circuits  may  be  hired  to  provide  audio 
(300  Hz  to  3  400  Hz)  or  64  kbits/s  channels  respectively.  Wider  bandwidths  are  available 
to  provide  more  channels,  for  example  12  channels  in  the  range  60  kHz  to  108  kHz  (FDM) 
or  30  channels  at  2,048  Mbits/s  or  24  channels  at  1.544  Mbits/s  (TDM/PCM). 


The  PTT  may  well  impose  certain  restrictions  on  the  use  of  their  circuits  particularly  where 
circuits  have  to  enter  HV  premises.  Isolation  transformers  will  be  necessary  as  well  as 
non-linear  devices  to  limit  dangerous  voltages,  although  the  use  of  these  on  circuits  used 
for  teleprotection  may  be  undesirable.  Where  d.c.  teleprotection  circuits  are  required, 
neutralising  transformers  can  be  used  to  cancel  the  earth  potential  rise  (EPR)  and  the 
induced  voltages  in  metallic  cables. 


5.1.3     Power  line  carrier  (PL C) 

a)    Principle 

The  electricity  industries  are  unique  in  that  they  have  available  to  them  very  reliable 
physical  paths,  i.e.  the  transmission  power  lines  which  interconnect  the  points  of 
generation  and  load  and  over  which  telecommunication  signals  can  be  transmitted. 
Since  the  high-voltage  transmission  line  is  used  as  the  communication  medium,  it  is  not 
possible  to  transmit  the  useful  audio  frequency  band  directly,  because  the  frequencies 
in  this  band  are  too  close  to  power  system  frequency  and  hence  it  is  necessary  to 
translate  the  audio  band  by  suitable  modulation  to  occupy  a  different  part  of  the 
spectrum.  For  this  power  line  carrier  equipment  has  been  specifically  designed  for  use 
on  a  power  network.  PLC  permits,  by  high  frequency  SSB  {Single  Side  Band)  modula- 
tion, the  transmission  of  analogue  information.  Although  primarily  Intended  to  utilise 
overhead  transmission  power  lines,  PLC  can  also  be  used  for  communication  over: 


submarine  or  underground  power  cables; 

cable  incorporated  into  ground  wires  (coaxial  or  quadded  cables). 


23 


IS  14392  :  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

b)  PLC  frequencies 

The  range  of  frequencies  suitable  for  conventional  power  line  carrier  transmission 
extends  from  about  30  kHz  to  500  kHz  (in  some  countries  490  kHz),  the  lower  limit 
being  fixed  by  the  limitations  and  cost  of  the  coupling  equipment,  and  the  upper  limit  by 
line  attenuation  and  radiation.  The  actual  range  of  frequencies  available  for  use  in  a 
particular  country  should  take  into  account  the  needs  of  various  radio  services  and 
broadcasting  services,  including  aeronautical  and  maritime  navigation  systems  together 
with  any  local  or  national  restrictions  or  regulations. 

c)  Applications 

Any  audio  frequency  channel  of  up  to  4  kHz  bandwidth  (in  some  countries  2,5  kHz)  is 
available  and  can  be  used  to  carry: 

either  analogue  information  in  the  form  of  speech,  or 

-  speech  plus  data  (S  +  D),  the  data  consisting  of  telemetering,  telecontrol,  tele- 
protection,  data,  etc. 

d)  Noise  and  permissible  signal  to  noise  ratio 

Power  line  carrier  links  are  subject  to  two  main  types  of  noise: 

i)     Sustained  white  noise-like  voltages  (random  noise)  caused  by  irregular  electrical 
discharges  across  insulators  and  conductors  (corona  or  brush  discharge). 

ii)    Short  spikes  and  bursts  of  high  amplitude  caused  by  operation  of  isolators  and 
breakers  or  by  lightning,  flashovers  and  the  like. 

These  noise  levels  determine  the  PLC  link  quality.  The  permissible  signal  to  noise  ratio 
limit  is  defined  in  I  EC  663. 

e)  PLC  offers: 

long  range  on  a  single  link  (several  hundred  kilometers  without  repeater  depend- 
ing on  the  transmitter  power  and  frequency); 

-  very  high  equipment  availability; 
very  high  equipment  reliabitity. 

In  spite  of  the  many  advantages,  there  are  some  limitations: 

-  narrow  AF  bandwidth  and  hence  very  low  number  of  channels; 

-  narrow  available  HP  spectrum; 

-  attenuation  increase  due  to  use  of  HV  line  transpositions; 

-  dependence  on  electrical  line  availability. 


This  subclause  Is  intended  to  cover  fixed  radio  links:  microwave  and  UHF. 

a)    Main  features 

Radio  links  are  widely  used  to  provide  power  system  telecommunication  services  for 
the  following  reasons 

-     galvanic  isolation; 

independence  from  power  lines; 

24 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

large  number  of  circuits; 

low  cost  In  comtarison  with  other  media; 

additional  services  can  be  provided  relatively  easily  and  at  low  cost; 

-  easy  maintenance  (the  equipments  are  located  at  a  few  sites  only); 

-  high  quality  and  high  reliability. 

However  there  are  fundamental  difficulties  in  the  provision  of  radio  links  i.e.: 

-  obtaining  suitable  frequency  assignments; 

-  propagation  problems  depending  on  frequency  and  fading  (non-total  availability 
during  adverse  weather); 

repeater  cost  and  need  for  power  supplies; 
difficulties  in  linking  low  attitude  stations. 

b)  Design  considerations 

The  first  stage  is  to  determine  the  exact  locations  which  are  to  be  Interconnected  and 
the  necessary  transmission  capacity.  This  first  approach  will  then  determine  the  appro- 
priate frequency  range.  The  radio  path  loss  budget  can  be  determined  by  calculation  of: 

-  free  space  loss; 

-  additional  losses  in  the  form  of  fading,  sometimes  deep  (obstacles,  variation  in 
refractive  index  of  the  atmosphere,  absorption,  multipath  reflections,  etc.); 

-  interference  calculations. 

Then,  all  the  necessary  equipments  can  be  defined  as  follows: 

-  terminal  equipment; 

-  repeater  equipment; 

-  type  of  wave  guide  feeder; 

-  type  of  antennae; 

-  height  of  towers. 

An  example  of  typical  radio  link  is  given  in  figure  12. 

c)  Frequencies  available 

Frequency  assignments  are  generally  made  by  the  national  frequency  administration. 
Information  is  provided  in  ITU  and  CCIR  publications. 

5.1.5     Mobile  radio 

Mobile  radio  makes  use  of  VHF  (70  MHz  to  165  MHz  band)  and  UHF  (400  MHz  to 
470  MHz  band)  using  AM  or  FM  (PM). 


At  its  simplest,  mobile  radio  in  the  VHF  band  consists  of  a  base  station  usually  located^at 
as  high  a  point  as  possible  and  a  number  of  mobile  units,  each  equipped  with  trans- 
ceivers. 


25 


IS   14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 

5.1.6  Fibre  optics 

An  optical  fibre  link  is  characterised  by  the  following  main  properties: 

-  very  wide  bandwidth; 

-  very  low  attenuation; 

-  immunity  to  electromagnetic  interference; 

-  low  weight  and  small  cable  size; 
reliability  unknown  but  likely  to  be  good; 
high  cost  in  comparison  with  other  media; 

-  high  transmission  quality. 

Thus,  this  transmission  medium  is  suitable  for  transmission  of  many  simultaneous 
channels  by  means  of  time  division  multiplexing. 

For  this  purpose,  the  design  ist)btained  by  loss  budget  and  bandwidth  budget  calcula- 
tions which  permit  determination  of: 

-  type  of  optical  fibre  (multimode  or  single  mode  fibres); 

-  type  of  light  transmitter  (LASER  diode  or  LED); 
type  of  light  receiver; 

-  ancillary  equipment  (repeater,  etc); 

-  available  bandwidth. 

An  example  of  a  typical  optical  fibre  link  is  given  in  figure  13. 

5.1 .7  Satellite  systems 

Where  the  territory  to  be  covered  is  large,  consideration  should  be  given  to  using  the 
facilities  provided  by  satellite  systems.  Each  outstation  and  the  control  centre  would 
require  an  earth  station  equipped  with  a  suitable  aerial.  Unfortunately  the  cost  of  such 
systems  is  high  and  also  requires  hiring  of  the  satellite  service  from  a  carrier  as  the  user 
does  not  own  the  facility.  TDM  systems  operate  over  satellites,  hence  many  of  the  attrib- 
utes of  optical  fibre  and  fixed  link  radio  also  apply  (e.g.  many  channels  of  high  quality  with 
good  S/N). 


5.2     Multiplex  equipment 

In  order  to  make  effective  use  of  the  transmission  medium,  it  Is  necessary  to  carry  simulta- 
neously more  than  one  audio  frequency  channel.  This  can  be  realised  by  analogue  (FDM) 
or  digital  (TDM)  multiplexing  techniques.  The  CCITT  have  laid  down  a  number  of  recom- 
mendations for  such  systems. 

a)    Frequency  division  multiplex,  FDM 

With  this  method  a  number  of  audio  channels  are  translated  to  occupy  discrete 
positions  In  a  frequency  domain  covering  a  wide  frequency  band. 


26 


is  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 

Each  audio  channel,  including  a  signalling  frequency  of  3  825  Hz,  occupies  a  bandwidth 
of  4  kHz.  The  translation  is  made  in  successive  steps,  first  by  combining  into  primary 
groups  of  12  channels  (bandwidth  60  kHz  to  108  kHz)  then  into  supergroups  of  60 
channels  (bandwidth  60  kHz  to  300  kHz)  and  so  on. 

b)    Time  division  multiplex,  TDM 

With  this  method  a  number  of  audio  channels  are  digitised  and  then  translated  to 
occupy  discrete  positions  in  the  time  domain. 

The  audio  channels  are  sequentially  sampled  at  a  rate  of  8  000  times  per  second.  The 
pulse  amplitude  sample  taken  for  each  channel  corresponds  to  the  amplitude  of  the 
complex  wave-form  at  the  instant  of  sampling.  The  pulse  amplitude  is  then  coded  into 
an  8  bit  binary  code  and  is  allocated  a  time  slot  within  the  multiplexed  signal.  Thus  an 
audio  channel  produces  a  digital  signal  of  64  kbits/s. 

For  30  channel  PCM,  a  basic  frame  of  2,048  f\/lbits/s  is  composed  of  a  time-frame  of 
pulses  representing  30  telephony  channels  plus  two  channels  reserved  for  signalling 
and  synchronisation  (32  x  64  =  2,048  Mbits/s). 

This  basic  frame  can  be  multiplexed  with  other  frames  to  increase  the  transmission 
bit-rate  (8;  34  Mbits/s,  etc.). 

Alternatively,  for  24  channel  PCM  a  basic  frame  of  1,544  Mbits/s  is  composed  of  a  time- 
frame of  pulses  representing  24  telephony  channels  with  an  additional  synchronisation 
bit  for  every  frame  ([8  x  24  +  1]  x  8  =  1,544  Mbits/s).  This  basic  frame  can  be  multi- 
plexed with  other  frames  to  increase  the  transmission  bit-rate  (6;  32  Mbits/s,  etc). 


c)    Applications 

This  equipment  is  suitable  for  the  following  types  of  telecommunication  link: 
microwave; 

-  coaxial; 

-  optical  fibre  (TDM  preferably); 

-  satellite  services. 


27 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Electrical  public  utility 


Headquarters 


Computing  centre 


power  station 
(thermal) 


Substation 


Load 


power  atation 
(hydro) 


Load 


Figure  1 


28 


Electncai  public  utHitv 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 


PSTN   < 


\ 


Headquarters 


Power  «tation 
(thermal) 


PSTN 


Substation 


Load 

■■■'■■  Internal  to  utility 
■  ■  «  ■  External  to  utility 
PSTN         Public  switched  telephone  network 


Power  station 
(hydro) 


■  M  ■  PSTN 


Load 


Maintenance  centre 


PSTN 


Figure  2  -  Administrative  telephone  service 


29 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Electrical  public  utility 


Headquarters 


Computing  centre 


Power  station 
(thermal) 


Power  station 
(hydro) 


Maintenance  centre 


Figure  3  -  Operational  telephony 


30 


Electrical  public  utility 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Headquarters 


Computing  centre 


Lead 


Telecontrol  links 


Figure  4  -  Telecontrol 


31 


IS  14392 :  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Electrrcal  public  utility 


Headquarters 


Computing  centre 


Power  station 
(thermal) 


Control  centre 

f 


Substation 


Power  station 
(hydro) 


Load 


Maintenance  centre 


Figure  5  -  Load  management 


32 


Electrical  pubiic  utility 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC   1085    (1992) 


Headquarters 


Computing  centre 


Power  station 
(thermal) 


Control  centre 


Load 


Load 


Teleprotection  links 


Maintenance  centre 


Figure  6  -  Teleprotection 


33 


IS  14392 :  1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Electrical  public  utility 


H<»adquarters 


Computing  centre 


Control  centre 


Mobile  radio  links 


Figure  7  -  Mobile  radio 


34 


Electrical  public  utility 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Headquarters 


Control  centre 


Computing  centre 


Power  station 
(thermal) 


Substation 


Power  station 
(hydro) 


Load 


Load 


Main  computir>g 
traffic  Units 


Possible  computing 
traffic  links 


Maintenance  centre 


Figure  8  -  Computing  trafic 


35 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Electrical  public  utility 


MCC 

Main  (or  national) 
control  centre 


OCC 


District  control  centre 


RCC 


Regional  or  area 
control  centre 


PS 


Power  station 


Alternative  (a  power  station  may  be  connected 
either  to  regional  control  centre  or 
to  a  district  control  centre) 


Outstation,  controlled  station 
or  remote  terminal  unit  (RTU) 


Figure  9  -  Typical  hierarchical  structure  o1  a  telecontrol  system 


36 


Electrical  public  utility 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (t992) 


Telecommunication  transmission  media 


Pilot  cables 

owned  by 

elect   utility 


Power  (ine 
carrier 


Circuits  leased 
from  PITS 


Mobile  radio 


Fixed  link  radio 


Satellite 
services 


Fibre  optics 


Figure  10 


37 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


ElecUical  public  utility 


Isolating 
transformer 


Lightning 
arrestor 


Terminal 
equipment 


NOTES 

1  Isolating  transformers  having  fully  floating  primary  and  secondary  windings  do  not  employ  an  inter- 
winding  shield. 

2  Neutralising  transformers  can  also  be  employed  as  protective  devices  in  certain  situations. 


Figure  1 1  -  Example  of  use  of  audio  frequency  pilot  cables 


38 


Electrical  public  utility 


IS  14392:1996 
lEC  1085    (1992) 


Radio  relay  station 


Terminal  station 


Terminal  station 


Figure  12  -  Example  of  radio  link 


optical 

terminal 

equipment 


-a 


Optical  fibre 


> 


Optical 

terminal 

equipment 


Multiplexer 


Figure  13  -  Example  of  optical  fibre  link 


39 


(Continued  from  second  cover) 

lEC  481(1974)  Coupling  devices  for 
power  line  carrier  terminals 

lEC  495  (1974)  Recommendecl 
values  for  characteristic  input  and 
output  quantities  of  single  sideband 
power  line  carrier  terminals 

lEC  663  (1980)  Planning  of  (single 
sideband)  power  line  carrier  systems 


IS  8997  :  1978  Coupling  devices  for  Technically 

PLC  systems  Equivalent 

IS  9482 : 1 980  Characteristic  values  of  Technically 

inputs     and       outputs     of     single  equivalent 
sideband  PLC  terminals 

IS  9528  (Part  2)  :  1980  Manual  for  Technically 

planning  of  (SSB)  PLC  systems  :  Part  equivalent 
2  PLC  systems  planning 


The  concerned  technical  committee  has  reviewed  the  provisions  of  lEC  870-6  Telecontrol  equipment 
and  systems  —  Part  6  :  Telecontrol  protocols  compatible  with  ISO  and  CCITT  standards'  (under 
consideration),  referred  in  this  adopted  standard  and  has  decided  that  it  is  acceptable  for  use  in 
conjunction  with  this  standard. 

Only  the  English  language  text  in  the  Internationa!  Standard  has  been  retained  while  adopting  it  in 
this  Indian  Standard. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  maybe  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions'. 

TViic    T«H;n«    Q.tn-nAnrA   Viic  Kaan  Aa\tci^r\ni^A   ff/M-n    r~»/->/^   .     KTr\       T   TT^     O^     f    1  ^CT   ^ 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquaiters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  83  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices : 

Central    :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern    :  1/14  C  LT.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34- A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600113 


Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400093 


Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


Telephone 


{ 


323  76  17 
323  38  41 


r  337  84  99,  337  85  61 
\  337  86  26,  337  91  20 


{ 


60  38  43 

60  20  25 


r  235  02  16,  235  04  42 
\  235  15  19,  235  23  15 


{ 


832  92  95,  832  78  58 
832  78  91,832  78  92 


Branches :  AHMAD ABAD.      BANGALORE.         BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR.    KANPUR.    LUCKNOW.    PATNA.    THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Dee  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi,  India 


