**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13937-1 (1994) : Statistical methods of determining and 
verifying stated noise emission values of machinery and 
equipment. Part 1: General considerations and definitions 
[ETD 15: Rotating Machinery] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vf ijii^s^yiis^ i s:>&^ nT¥seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13937 ( Part 1 } : 1994 
ISO 7574/1 : 1985 

mTrft^r m^^ ^ Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

WTrT ^T# sftT ^^JT^^ ^x^ ^ ^ffe^^r ^^fir^rt 

Indian Standard 

STATISTICAL METHODS OF DETERMINING 
AND VERIFYING STATED NOISE EMISSION 
VALUES OF MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT 

PARTI GENERALCONSIDERATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



UDC 534-835'46 : 519'23 



O BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1994 Prfce Group 2 



Acoustics Sectional Committee, LTD 5 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) which is identical with ISO 7574/1 : 1985 'Acoustics — Statistical 
methods for determining and verifying stated noise emission values of machinery and equipment — 
Part 1 : General considerations and definitions' issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of 
the Acoustics Sectional Committee ( LTD 5 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunica- 
tion Division Council. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards, 
Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

CROSS REFERENCES 

In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the following: 

International Standard Indian Standard Degree of 

Correspondence 

lEC 651 : 1979 Sound level meter IS 9779 : 1981 Specification for Technically equivalent 

sound level meter 

The Technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the 
provisions of the following International Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for 
use in conjunction with this standard: 

ISO 3534 Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols 

ISO 3741 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources — Precision 

methods for broad-band sources in reverberation rooms 
ISO 3742 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources — - Precision 

methods for discrete-frequency and narrow-band sources in reverberation rooms 

ISO 3743 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources — Engineering 

methods for special reverberation test rooms 
ISO 3744 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources — Engineering 

methods for free-field conditions over a reflecting plane 
ISO 3745 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources — Precision 

methods for anechoic and semi-anechoic rooms 
ISO 3746 Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources — Survey 

method 

ISO 3951 Sampling procedures and charts for inspection by variables for percent defective 
ISO 4871 Acoustics — Noise labelling of machinery and equipment 

ISO 5725 Precision of test methods — Determination of repeatability and reproducibility by 
inter-laboratory tests 



IS 13937 (Parti ) : 1994 
ISO 7574/1 : 1985 



Indian Standard 



STATISTICAL METHODS OF DETERMINING 
AND VERIFYING STATED NOISE EMISSION 
VALUES OF MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT 

PART 1 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 



Introduction to ISO 7574 

In order to state the noise emission value for 
a machine or a batch of machines in an 
unambiguous manner, this four-part series of 
international Standards provides guidelines 
for determining the noise emission value to 
be stated (e.g. as a labelled value) and 
specifies verification procedures. These 
methods are based on the premise of clearly 
defined acoustical measurement methods and 
describe the handling of the variability of the 
measurement results and, if relevant, of the 
noise emissions of the machines in a batch. 

The methods presented in this series of Inter- 
national Standards are compatible with the 
requirements specified in ISO 4871, i.e., 

— the stated ( e. g. labelled ) value Indicates 
the limit below which the noise emission 
value of the individual machine and/or a 
specified large proportion of the noise 
emission values of the batch lies; 

— the basic noise emission quantity used is 
the A-welghted sound power level. 

Although this series of International Standards 
is drafted mainly in terms of A-weighted 
sound power level as a noise emission 
quantity. It is equally applicable to other 
quantities. 

In this series of International Standard the 
term "label" is considered to include all 
means for providing information on the noise 
emission values to potential users [of the 
equipment; this includes labels, brochures, 
advertisements, commercial literature, etc. 
Requirements for this may be stipulated, for 
example, in a contract or in regulations. 

The methods described may be applied not 
only to values stated for labelling purposes, 
but also to values stated for other purposes, 
for example: 

— to the upper noise limit set by an authority 
orspecified in a technical standard for a 
specific family of machines; 



— to contract values as agreed by the manu- 
facturer and purchaser of the machine(s). 

This series of International Standards does 
not specify whether, or for which specific 
family of machines, the purposes mentioned 
above are relevant or whether the methods for 
determining and verifying stated noise 
emission values should be applied. This is 
left to a labelling code specific to the machi- 
nery or equipment concerned or, if this does 
not exist, to an agreement between the users 
of the standards ( e. g. in a contract ). 

Two cases are considered: 

— the stated value is given for one indivi- 
dual machine; 

— the stated value is given for an entire 
batch of machines. 

For economic reasons, the stated values for 
batches of series-produced machines may be 
verified by sampling procedures. 

This four-part series of International 
Standards does not deal with the consequ- 
ences that ensue If the stated value is not 
verified for a single machine or for a batch 
( lot ) of machines. 

This series of International Standards which 
comprise ISO 7574 requires that the labelled 
value be determined using the same measure- 
ment test code as that specified for verifi- 
cation. It, therefore, applies to families of 
machines or equipment for which special 
measurement test codes for the determination 
of noise emission quantities are prepared. If 
no special test code for a particular family 
exists, the methods specified in ISO 3741, 
ISO 3742, ISO 3743, ISO 3744 and ISO 3745 
may be appropriate. 

NOTE — This does not preclude the use of other 
International Standards, e. g. ISO 3746, which may 
form the basis of special measurement test codes. 

In each case the installation and operating 
conditions typical for normal use shall be 
clearly specified or agreed. 



1 



IS13937( Parti ) 
ISO 7574/1 :1985 



1994 



The relevant measurement conditions may 
provide information, in the form of standard 
deviations, on the dispersion of measurement 
resuits. A measure for the dispersion of the 
emission values dueto the different emissions 
of the different machines is the standard 
deviation of production ( see 3.18 ). 

The series of international Standards which 
make up ISO 7574 comprises the following 
four parts: 

Part 1 : General considerations and defi- 
nitions 

Part 2 : Methods for stated values for 
individual machines 

Parts : Simple (transition) method for 
stated values for batches of 
machines 

Part 4 : Methods for stated values for 
batches of machines 

1 Scope and field of application 

This part of ISO 7574 defines terms relating 
to methods for determining and verifying the 
stated ( e. g. labelled ) values of the noise 
emitted by machinery and equipment. 

This four-part series of international 
Standards applies both to machines which 
are produced in very small quantities as well 
as to machines which are produced by mass 
production methods. 



Vocabulary and 



2 References 

ISO 3534, Statistics 
symbols- 

ISO 3741, Acoustics — Determination of sound 
power levels of noise sources — Precision 
methods for broad-band sources in reverbera- 
tion rooms 

ISO 3742, Acoustics — Determination of sound 
power levels of noise sources — Precision 
methods for discrete-frequency and narrow- 
band sources in reverberation rooms. 

ISO 3743, Acoustics — Determination of sound 
power levels of noise sources — Engineering 
methods for special reverberation test rooms. 

ISO 3744, Acoustics — Determination of sound 
power levels of noise sources — Engineering 
methods for free-field conditions over a reflec- 
ting plane. 

ISO 3745, Acoustics — Determination of sound 
power levels of noise sources — Precision 
methods for ancchoic and semi-anechoic rooms. 



ISO 3746, Acoustics — Determination of sound 
power levels of noise sources — Survey method, 

ISO 3951, Sampling procedures and charts for 
inspection by variables for percent defective^ 

ISO 4871, Acoustics — Noise labelling of 
machinery and equipment. 

ISO 5725, Precision of test methods — Deter- 
mination of repeatability and reproducibility by 
inter-laboratory tests* 

lEC Publication 651, Souud level meters. 
3 Definitions 

3.1 sound power level, Lwf in decibels : Ten 

times the logarithm to the base ten of the 
ratio of a given sound power to the reference 
sound power. The reference sound power is 
1 pW. 

3.2 A-weighted sound power level. Lwa, in 
decibels : The sound power level of a noise 
source, determined according to an appro- 
priate measurement test code with frequency 
weighting A ( see l£C 651 ) selected on the 
measuring instruments. 

3.3 noise emission quantity; noise emission 
value : The basic noise emission quantity is 
the A-weighted sound power level, Lwa. 

A single value of the noise emission quantity 
is called a noise emission value. 

NOTE — Henceforth, the subscripts WA are left out 
both for reasons of simplicity and so as not to 
exclude the use of another noise emission quantity. 

3.4 measured value : The noise emission 
value for an individual machine actually deter- 
mined in accordance with an appropriate 
measurement test code. 

NOTE — Measured values shall not be rounded. 
According to this part of ISO 7574, the term 
"messured value'* is used as a result of the mea- 
surement test code being applied. 

3.5 family of machines : Machines or equip- 
ment of similar design or type, or intended to 
perform the same functions, 

NOTES 

1 A family may include different designs which meet 
the performance requirements, different production 
batches of a given design from one manufacturer, 
comparable products from different manufacturers 
in various countries designed to fulfil the same 
purpose or machines of different sizes but of similar 
design. 

2 Examples of families of machines are a group of 
rotating electrical machines of a given range of 
power and epeed, a group of concrete mixers with a 
certain range of volumetric capacities. 



IS 13937 (Parti ) 
ISO 7574/1 : 1985 



1994 



3.6 stated value; labelled value, /.c : The 

value, expressed as an integral, of the noise 
emission quantity stated for an indiviciual 
machine or for ail machines in a batch The 
stated (labelled) value indicates the limit 
below which the noise emission value of the 
individual machine and/or a specified large 
proportion of the noise emission values of 
the batch lies when the machines are new. 

NOTES 

1 The term "labelled value" stands for all kinds of 
stated values for which the methods described may 
be applied. 

2 When using the A-weighted sound power level as 
the noise emission quantity, the labelled value may 
be expressed as the numerical value of the A-weight- 
ed sound power level limit ( see above ), In decibels, 
divided by ten, given to one decimal place. 

3.7 label : A statement of the labelled value, 
Z.C, which is Included in product literature and/ 
or affixed to a machine or a piece of equip- 
ment. 

3.8 batch ( lot) of machines : A group of 
the same family produced in quantity, manu- 
factured to the same technical specifications 
and characterized by the same labelled value, 
U 

NOTE — The batch may be either an entire produc- 
tion series or a portion thereof. 

3.9 size of the batch (or of the population), 

N : Number of items ( machines in the batch 
or noise emission values in the population ). 

3.10 sample : One or more machines C for 
measured values ) randomly selected ( or 
determined ) from a lot ( or population ). 



3.11 sample size, n 

sample. 



Number of items in the 



3.12 arithmetic mean of a batch (or of a 
population, y^i The sum of the noisa emis- 
sion values in a batch ( or in a population ) 
divided by the size of the batch ( or of the 
population ) : 



N 



^ N ^ 



;=i 



n ^^ 



The arithmetic mean value of the sample, Z., 
is used as an estimator of the mean value of 
a lot ( or of a population ), /a. 

3.14 standard deviation of a batch ( or of 
population ), o : The standard deviation of 
the noise emission values of the batch ( or of 
the population ) of size N is given by the 
equation: 



3.13 arithmetic means of a sample, L : The 

sum of the measured values, /./, in a sample 
divided by sample size: 



^ /-I 



Ui~ y^ ? 



3.15 standard deviation of a sample, s : 

The standard deviation of the sample is given 
by the equation: 



s =- 



\j-r=rTtu^ 



Ly 



/-i 



/=i 



The standard deviation of the sample, a, is 
used as an estimator of the standard deviation 
of a batch ( or of a population ), a. 

3.16 standard deviation of repeatability, 

a, ( see ISO 5725 ) : Stanoard deviation of 
noise emission values obtained under repeat- 
ability conditions, that is the repeated 
application of the same noise emission 
measurement method on the same noise 
source within a short interval of time under 
the same conditions ( same laboratory, same 
operator, same apparatus ). 

3.17 standard deviation of reproducibility, 

CTR (see ISO 5725): Standard deviation of 
noise emission values obtained under repro- 
ducibility conditions, that is the repeated 
application of the same noise emission 
measurement method on the same noise 
source at different times and under different 
conditions ( different laboratory, different 
operator, different apparatus ^ The standard 
deviation of reproducibility, therefore, includes 
the standard oeviation of repeatability 
( see 3.16 ) 

NOTE — An estimate of (Tr to be given in the 
measurement test code for the family of machines 
should preferably be derived from an inter-laboratory 
test. In the absence of such a test, an may be agreed 
upon provisionally. 

3.18 standard deviation of production, ap: 

Standard deviation of the different means 
( of noise emission values ) obtained on 
different machines from a batch ( see 3 8 }, 
using the same noise emission measurement 
method under repeatability conditions (same 
laboratory, same operator, same apparatus ). 



IS 13937 ( Parti ) 
ISO 7574/1 : 198S 



1994 



NOTE — The following formula applies, but In 
practice the value of the term ffr^/A becomes negligi- 



ble; 
ffp 



-^..--!_ 



where 

a' is the standard deviation of the means; 
ar is the standard deviation of repeatability ( see 
3.16); 

k is the number of measured values for the determi- 
nation of the mean for one machine. 

3.19 total standard deviation, at: The square 
root of the sum of the squares of the standard 
deviation of reproducibility ( see 3 17 ) and of 
the standard deviation of production 
( see 3.18 ): 



<yt 



=V'"' 



+ Gp 



3.20 reference standard deviation, gm: A 

total standard deviation ( see 3.19 ) specified 
for the family of machines under considera- 
tion which is considered to be typical for 
batches from this family. 

NOTE — The use of a fixed Gm for each family 
enables the application of a statistical method to 
deal with small sample sizes. If the actual total 
standard deviation at is known to be different from 
CTmi the labeiler estimates his risk of rejection on 
the basis of both standard deviations, crt and Cm- 

Typical values of Cm range from 1"5 to 3*5 d^cepend- 
ing on the precision of the measurement method 
used and on the complexity of the noise source. 
Extensive tests may be needed to establish (Tm for a 
family of machines. 

3.21 single sampling ( see ISO 3534): A type 
of sampling which consists of taking only 
one sample from the batch. 

3.22 double sampling ( see ISO 3534 }: A 
type of sampling which consists of taking 
possibly a second sample according to the 
information given by the first. 

323 sequential sampling ( see ISO 3534 ): A 
type of sampling which consists of taking 
successive items, but without fixing their 
number in advance, the decision to acceptor 
reject the lot being taken as soon as the 
results permit, according to rules laid down 
in advance. 

3.24 inspection by variables (see ISO 3534 ): 
A method which consists of measuring a 
quantitative characteristic for each item of a 
population or of a sample taken from this 
population. The quantitative characteristic is 
the noise emission quantity, 

NOTES 

1 The method used in this four-part series of ISO 
7574 for assessing the acceptability of a batch using 
previous knowledge of its standard deviation is 
called the ff-method. The s-method ( assessing the 
acceptability of a batch using the standard deviation 
based on measurements of all the items in a 
sample ) is not considered in this four-part series of 
ISO 7574. 



2 Inspection by attributes is method which consists 
in taking note, for every item in a population or in a 
sample taken from this population, of the presence 
or absence of a certain qualitative characteristic 
( attribute and in counting how many items have or 
do not have this characteristic ) is not considered in 
this four-part series of ISO 7574. 

3.25 probability of acceptance, Pa ( see ISO 

3634 ): The probability that a batch of a given 
quality ( expressed by its proportion p of 
noise emission values exceeding the labelled 
value ) will be accepted by a given samp'ing 
plan. 

NOTE -— ( 1 - Pa ) is called "probability of reject- 
ion". If ( 1 - Pa ) has the fixed value a ( see 3.27) , 
this is called the 'producer's risk'. If Pa has the 
fixed value p ( see 3.28 ), this is called the "consu- 
mer's risk". 

3.26 operating characteristic curve, OC: 

A curve showing, for a given sampling plan, 
the probability of acceptance Pa of a batch as 
a function of its proportion p of noise emis- 
sion values exceeding the labelled value. 

NOTE — The operating characteristic curve is fully 
determined by two specified points ( for example, the 
producer's risk point ) ( see 3.27 ) and the consu- 
mer's risk point ( see 3.28 ) or by one point (for 
example the producer's risk point ) and the sample 
size n. 

3.27 producer's risk point ( see ISO 3534 ): 
A point on the operating characteristic curve 
corresponding to a predetermined and usually 
low probability of rejection a. This probability 
of rejection is called the * producer's risk'*. 
The corresponding quality level is the pro- 
portion pi-a of noise emission values of the 
batch exceeding the labelled value. 

NOTES 

1 According to ISO 7574/4, the producer's risk 
point is fixed a and pi _ a therefore from a pair of 
fixed values. 

2 For continuous production of batches the accep- 
table quality level ( AQL ) ( see ISO 3951 ) would be 
approximately equal to Pi - a. 

3.28 consumer's risk point ( see ISO 3534 ) : 
A point on the operating characteristic curve 
corresponding to a predetermined and usually 
low probability of acceptance p. This proba- 
bility of acceptance is then called the 
"consumer's risk". The corresponding batch 
quality is the proportion /?3 of noise emission 
values of the batch exceeding the labelled 
value and this is called the limiting quality. 

3-29 level difference, AZ.: A value which, 
for a fixed producer's risk point, is used to 
take the consumer's viewpoints into consider- 
ation, and this is done principally by selecting 
an appropriate sample size, n. AZ., when 
subtracting from the labelled value /.« (i.e. 
Z.'c = U — A/. ), would give a low labelled 
value i'c with such a high proportion, p3, of 
noise emission values exceeding £'p that 
acceptance would only be possible with a 
very low probability, p ( see 3 28 ). 



Brueau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSrmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LTD 05 ( 1666 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar xMarg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all offices ) 

Telephone 

{ 331 01 31 
1 331 13 75 

( 37 84 99, 37 85 61 
I 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 
I 53 23 84 



235 02 16, 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 

632 92 95, 632 78 58 
632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



PriDted at New India Priatiug Press, Khurja, India 



