**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14165 (1995) : Handling of carcinogenic substances - code 
of safety [CHD 8: Occupational Safety^ Health and Chemical 
Hazards] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14165 : 1995 

_jx ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

HANDLING CARCINOGENIC SUBSTANCES - 

CODE OF SAFETY 



UDC 614-878 : 661 



© BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1995 Price Group 2 



Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 007 



FOREWORD 

Cancer causing agents or substances are called carcinogens, capable of inducing tumors; possible 
examples are chemicals, viruses and some type of radiations. Exposure over a number of years to small 
amounts of carcinogens may be sufficient to cause cancer, even though at the time of exposure(s) they 
may not produce any warning signs ( such as odour ) or symptoms ( coughing or nausea ) on entering 
the body. 

Human exposure to carcinogens may occur in the work place through exposure to various industrial 
materials and processes. Seventy five percent cases of human cancer are influenced by extrinsic factors. 
Given the multiple sources of carcinogens in the work place and environment, it can be extremely 
difficult to attribute individual case of cancer to a single source. However, the reduction of exposure 
gens from any source should generally reduce the overall risk of cancer to humans. Effects of to 
carcinomutagenic and carcinogenic inducer can also be risk to humans. 

The composition of technical committee responsible for the formulation of this Indian Standard is given 
in Annex A. 

Considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications in preparing this code of 
safety: 

a) Alderson M. ( 1978 ) Industrial Cancer Whose Responsibihty. Annals. Occup. Hyg. ( 1978 ) 
Vol 21, 285-291. 

b) Canadian Data Sheet of Occupational Safety and Health ( Rev. 1985 ) 1-2, Ontario, Canada. 

c) Carcinogenic Substances Control and Regulation. NIOSH. 



IS 14165 : 1995 



Indian Standard 



HANDLING CARCINOGENIC SUBSTANCES 

CODE OF SAFETY 



1 SCOPE 

This code covers guidelines which should be 
followed while handling carcinogenic substances. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No, Title 

4155 : 1966 Glossary of terms relating to 
chemical and radiation hazards 
and hazardous chemicals 

4167: 1980 Glossary of terms relating to air 
pollution (first revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 4155 : 1966 and 4167: 1980 shall 
apply. 

4 PREVENTION MEASURES 

4.1 The first line of defence is the recognition 
of the hazard. Maintain a list of known and 
suspected carcinogens used in the work place. 

4.2 The second line of defence should be 
engineering controls at design stage. These 
controls which should strive to eliminate 
exposure to carcinogens, include a closed 
system, mechanical seals, remote controls, 
local ventilation or exhaust ventilation system. 

4.3 In selecting engineering control measures, 
a number of factors should be considered by 
management such as carcinogenic potency; 
physical state ( gas, vapour, liquid, fume, dust ), 
particle size; reactivity and corrosiveness of the 
carcinogen; nature of the industrial process; 
amount of carcinogens handled; and duration 
of exposure. 

4.4 Personal protective equipment should be 
used wherever required. 

5 HAZARD ELIMINATION 

Carcinogenic substances shall be replaced with 
less harmful substances where feasible. 

6 HAZARD CONTROL 

6.1 Processes to be Isolated 

6.2 Closed systems should be used whenever 
possible. Operations which cannot be contained 



should be provided with adequate local exhaust 
ventilation. 

6.3 Continuous general mechanical exhaust 
ventilation should be provided to all areas 
( including storage ) so that air movement is 
always from general work areas to the carcino- 
gen-handling areas. Regular certification pro- 
cedures must be in place to ensure that all air 
handling systems are working properly. The 
exhaust air should be discharged through a 
scmbber or flare system. In the case of failure 
of ventilation system, alarms and established 
evacuation procedure should be maintained. 

6.4 In work areas where potentially high 
exposures may occur, it is essential to continu- 
ously monitor exposure levels. 

6.5 Procedures should be established for 
removal and decontamination of carcinogens 
from equipment, material, clothing or other 
items. 

6.6 Warning signs and instructions should be 
posted. 

6.7 All containers of carcinogens should be 
labelled with instructions for safe handling. 

6.8 Appropriate measures should be developed 
to prevent leakage or spillage. 

7 SAFE WORK PRACTICES 

7.1 Management, in conjunction with em- 
ployees, should establish cod^s of practice for 
the safe use, storage and disposal of 
carcinogens. 

7.2 Management should minimize the number 
of persons exposed and the duration and level 
of exposure, by job rotation if necessary. 

7.3 Emergency procedures, including evacua- 
tion of personnel should be developed for 
areas where it is possible to have serious leaks 
and spills. 



facilities and practices 
for exposed workers 



7.4 Adequate hygienic 
should be established 
as given below. 

7.4.1 A double locker system adjacent to a 
carcinogen handling area, where each worker 
has a locker for street clothes in clean locker 
room and a locker for work clothes. 



IS 14165 : 1995 



7*4.2 A shower room located between the two 
locker rooms so that each worker takes a shower 
before putting on street clothes. 

7.4.3 Prior to leaving the carcinogen area, 
workers should leave their protective clothing 
and equipment at the point of exit. At the 
termination of shift workers should be requir- 
ed to place used clothing and equipment in 
impervious containers at the point of exil for 
the purpose of decontamination or disposal. 

7.4.4 Workers should wash hands, forearms, 
face and neck on each exit from carcinogen- 
handling area, using facilities adjacent to the 
point of exit, and before engaging in other 
activities such as eating, drinking, smoking and 
using toilet facilities. 

7.4.5 Workers should shower after the end of 
their shift. 

7.4.6 Drinking fountains are not to be placed 
in the carcinogen handling area. 

7.4.7 Eating, drinking, chewing or smoking are 
to be prohibited in the carcinogen-handling 
areas. 

7.4.8 Dry sweeping is to be prohibited in 
carcinogen-handling areas. ( Any vacuum 
cleaners used, should be equipped with high 
efficiency filters. ) 

8 SAFETY PROCEDURES FOR WORKERS 

8.1 Approved protective clothing and respira- 
tory equipment such as continuous air-supplied 
hoods or masks, impervious gloves, boots and 
overalls, shall be provided. 

8.2 Decontamination of the protective gar- 
ments and hoods should be done after use. 

8.3 Workers should use the shower after 
removal of the protective garments. 

8.4 Periodic medical check up of all employees 
should be carried out at a suitable frequency. 

8.5 Workers having keratosis, warts or xero- 
derma ( dryness of the skin ) should not be 
employed in occupation where there is cancer 
hazard. 

9 PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT 

If personal protective garments are used, they 
should be of the type which may be decontami- 
nated or discarded after use, so that the worker 
may not accidentally inhale or ingest contami- 
nants adhering to bis clothing or body or 
contaminant does not remain in contact with 
the skin. 

9.1 Provide workers with clean, complete body 
protective clothing, shoe, covers and gloves 
etc. 



9.2 Provide workers engaged in specific carcino- 
gen-handling operations with suitable respira- 
tors, approved for protection against the hazard 
in question, 

9.3 Provision of safety showers and eye wash 
fountains, in the work areas. 

10 WASTE DISPOSAL 

Disposal methods should be used which do not 
permit carcinogens to be introduced into work 
areas and which do not pollute the external 
environment. Discharge to the environment 
shall be avoided to the extent possible or it 
shall be avoided in accordance with the relevant 
rules and regulations. 

11 VIRUSES 

Guidelines on the handling of recombinant 
DNA molecules and animal viruses and cells 
should be followed. 

12 RADIATION 

Radiation devices in ionizing and non-ionizing 
frequencies considered to be hazardous to 
health must be examined and approved. 

12.1 Maintenance 

Only specifically trained employees should be 
allowed to maintain or repair equipment con- 
taminated with carcinogenic substances ( in- 
cluding leaks, spills, and the replacement of 
filters in gas or liquid lines ). In the case of an 
actual or a suspected spill all materials used in 
the clean up should be disposed off in accor- 
dance with an approved method for the 
particular chemical product involved. 

12.2 All contaminated waste material shall be 
transported in leak-proof containers. The waste 
container should bear the sign: CAUTION — 
CANCER CAUSING AGENT. Where such 
work could result in direct contact with the 
carcinogen, employees may have to wear clean 
impervious garments gloves and boots and a 
hood continuously supplied with clean air. 
Before removing protective gear, employees 
must first decontaminate its outer surface, then 
place such clothing and gear in impervious, pro- 
perly labelled containers for decontamination 
or disposal. Following removal, employees must 
take shower. 

13 SECONDARY PREVENTION 

This term is used for approaches that do not 
remove carcinogenic agent, but aim to identify 
disease at a stage when successful treatment 
can be applied. Screening of Vv'orkers to identify 
disease by physical examination includes 
cytology on a specimen, urine, blood, chest 
x-ray, or periodic cytoscopy and other internal 



IS 14165 : 1995 



examirtation, secondary prevention of cancer 
requires collaboration between management, 
individuals and the health Department. 

14 EDUCATIONAL TRAINING 
PROGRAMME 

Before being allowed to work with carcinogens, 
employees must receive specific training pro- 
gramme regularly in the following subjects; the 
carcinogenic potential of these substances; the 
kind of assignments which could result in 
exposure; decontamination and emergency 
procedures; the employees specific role in 
recognizing situations which may result in the 
release of these substances. This training must 
be repeated at appropriate intervals following 
the initial instruction. 

14.1 Personnel Selection 

14.1,1 Pre-placement Examination 

A pre-placement examination should be com- 
pleted by a physician who has been expert in 
toxicology of hazardous substances, on each 
new worker or transferee prior to employment 
in an area where exposure to carcinogens may 



occur. The purpose of this examination is to 
establish a base line against which changes can 
be measured and to determine whetlier there 
exists any medical or other conditions which 
may lead to increased risk in the work situation* 
Specific test for particular torgent organ should 
be conducted. 

14.1.2 It is suggested that while conducting 
pre-employment and periodical medical exami- 
nation, patch test should be performed to find 
out whether a person is allergic to the carcino 
genie substances. It will avoid skin disorders 
or any skin cancer. 

14.2 Medical Examinations 

The purpose of periodic medical examination 
is to determine whether a change in health 
status has occurred or if other conditions have 
developed which miglit lead to increased risk in 
the work situation, ft should be noted, how- 
ever, that it is unlikely these examinations can 
prevent the occurrence of cancer in an indivi- 
dual who is exposed to carcinogens. Specific 
regular biological monitoring test should be 
conducted for suspected type of cancer. 



IS 14165 : 1995 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 

X:0!V1MITTEE COMPOSITION 

Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 007 



Chairman 
Dr R. K. Garg 

Members 
Db S. K. Awasthi 

ShbI D. G. Bhatt {-Alternate ) 
Db a. Bhaskar 

Sfri a. Jhavab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi a. K. Ghakkabobty 



Representing 
Defence Recruitment Board, New Delhi 

Indian Petrochemical Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 
Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay 



Db J. G, BoMAN-E ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Ghatterji 

Shbi Subib Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. H. Ghudamaki 

Shbi A. G. Sbshan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. K. Ghojsh 
Shbi P. M. Kabia 

Shbi Mohan Patil ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. G. Kaimal 

Shbi Y. R. Jaishima ( Alternate ) 
Shbi T. S. Kbishnan 

Shbi J. P- Azabiah WinstOK ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. K. Mbhba 

Shbi Surindeb Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Db H. Mukherjee 

Shbi A. S. Ghosal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. V. Shastbi 
Db D.J. Pabikh 

Db T. S, Patel ( Alternate ) 
Db S. S. Rathi 

^hri R. Das { Alternate ) 
Shbi A. A. Ramakuishnan 

Db Ajay Pbakash ( Alternate ) 
Db K. V. Ramalingam 

Shbi Jayanta Adhia ( Alternate ) 
Representative 
Representative 
Representative 
Represent a tive 
Shbi J. P. Saxena 

Db S. p. Shabma ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. D. Sharma 

Shbi G. D. Bankar ( Alternate ) 
Db M. Sengupta 

Db ( Shbimati ) Indrani Ghandrasekaban 
{ Alternate ) 
Db p. K. Seth 

Db p. N. Viswanathan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. G. Srivastava 
Shbimati Sunita Kumab 
Db p. S. Venkatabamani 

Db a, K. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Anjan Kar, 
Director ( Chem ) 



Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour Institute, 
Bombay 



Tata Risk Management Services, New Delhi 

Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Rasayani 

Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Bombay 
Excel Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Directorate General of Ordinance Factory Board, Calcutta 

Southern Petrochemical Industries Corporation Ltd, Tuticorin 

Shiiram Food & Fertilizers Industries, New Delhi 

Department of Explosives, Nagpur 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmadabad 

Ministry of Defence ( DGQ,A ), New Delhi 

National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta 

National Safety Council, Bombay 

Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Oil Industries Safety Directorate, Bombay 

Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ll;d, Virbhadra 

Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi 

Ministry of Environment &_Forests, New Delhi 

i 

Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Projects & Development India Ltd, Sindri 

Development Gommiisioner, Small Scale Industries, New Delhi 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), New Delhi 

Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Member Secretary 

Shbi P. P. Malik 

Joint Director (Chem ), BIS 



BureAQ of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No: CHD 007 (9453). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola ( 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 [ 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 3« 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 ( 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

I 235 15 19, 235^3 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) { 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 ( 632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New ladta Printing press, Ehurja. India 



