**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13877 (1993) : Planning and design of fish pass - 
Guidelines [WRD 22: River Training and Diversion Works] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13877 : 1993 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



Indian Standard 

PLANNING AND DESIGN OF FISH PASS — 

GUIDELINES 



UDC 627*882 ( 026 ) 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1993 Price Group 3 



Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee, RVD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division 
Council. 

A fish pass is a device provided in barrages, rapids or similar type of obstacles in rivers to facilitate 
the movement of fish from upstream to downstream and vice-versa. 

When a diversion structure is constructed across the river, the passage of the fish is obstructed. 
Hence for the protection of fish, especially of migratory types, it would be necessary to construct 
suitable fish pass as a component of the diversion structure. Aspects relating to their location, 
investigation and data to be collected, type of fish passes, design requirements, etc, are included 
in this standard. 



IS 13877 : 1993 



Indian Standard 

PLANNING AND DESIGN OF FISH PASS — 

GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers guidelines for location, 
investigation, type and design offish pass. 

2 LOCATION 

2.1 The fish pass should be provided near the 
deep channel through which they always move 
about. Its location should be readily found by 
the migrating fish as otherwise the fish may never 
enter the fishway. 

2.2 The entrance and exit of the fish pass should 
be away from the range of heavy overfall of water 
from the diversion structure. The fish pass is 
usually located near the divide wall of the 
structure between the sluice bays and spillway 
bays, since water would always be available near 
the divide wall. 

3 INVESTIGATIONS AND DATA REQUIRED 

3.1 For planning and designing an effective fish 
pass, certain data should be collected after 
thorough investigations and the data analyzed. 
Some important investigations are given in 3.1.1 
to 3.2.2. 

3.1.1 Type of fish, their characteristics, habits, 
instincts and environmental behaviour. 

3.1.2 Place of spawning, whether at particular 
spots or anywhere. 

3.1.3 If anadromous in nature, location map of 
the river/streams showing the migratory route 
and spawning grounds. 

3.1.4 Timing of upstream and downstream 
migration, nature of river Hows, turbidity and 
temperature of water during these periods. 

3.1.5 Maximum number of fish passing per hour 
during peak migration period. 

3.1.6 Requirement of water per fish when 
confined to keep it in normal condition. 

3*1.7 Nature of migration, whether in groups or 
in line. 

3.1.8 The number offish passing upstream of the 
proposed structure for the previous periods say 
for a period of 30 years. 

3.1.9 Commercial value of the fisheries they 
contribute in order to work out economics of 
having a fish pass or not. 

3.1.10 The normal swimming speed of fish, its 
darting speed and preference for swimming or 
jumping. 



3.1.11 The stimuli of fish, whether it is attracted 
by large volume of water or greater velocity. 

3.1.12 The normal time that fish takes from 
downstream to spawning grounds and the delay 
which it is capable of withstanding without any 
detrimental effect on its biological functions. 

3.1.13 The size of downstream migrants. 

3.1.14 The nature of spawning ground and the 
river conditions at the time of spawning, namely, 
velocity, depth, turbidity and temperature of 
water. 

3.2 Hydraulics 

3.2.1 River velocity and river discharge are two 
most important hydraulic data which are to be 
known correctly. Other hydraulic data such as 
location of points of turbulence, upwelling and 
intensity of surge are to be correcitly recorded. 
These data can then be related to biological 
observations of the behaviour of fish in the 
marginal areas in order to ensure that the fishway 
is located in the best location. 

3.2.2 By plotting the hydrograph of river dis- 
charge and fish migration period, it is possible to 
determine the range of discharge likely to be 
available during the period of migration and the 
water surface profiles for each river bank cor- 
responding to this range may be used in the 
design of the fish pass. 

4 TYPES OF FISH PASS 

The fish pass can be of two types, namely, fish 
Jocks and fish ladders. The fish ladders can be 
further subdivided into f[\t types as (i) inclined 
chute type, (ii) pool and weir type, (iii) pool and 
orifice type, (iv) pool and jet type, and (v) Denil 
type. 

4.1 Fish Lock 

The operation offish lock ( see Fig. 1 ) is similar 
to that of navigation lock. A group of fish is 
admitted into the lock at a time and transferred 
either to upstream or downstream as the case 
may be. The lock is generally located next to 
the divide wall. 




°1)!» 



r u " 



Fig. 1 Typical Details or Fish Lock 



IS 13877 : 1993 



4.2 Fish Ladder 

4.2.1 Inclined Chute Type 

The inclined chute types have checks or baffles 
which are so arranged that the discharging water 
takes a zig-zag course, being driven from side to 
side. These are of two types namely, paired 
obstacle and alternate obstacle fish pass. 

4.2.1.1 Paired obstacles fish pass 

The paired obstacles fish pass ( see Fig. 2 ) 
consists of a sloping pairs of obstacles spaced 
along the channel at intervals equal to about the 
width of the channel and a straight free passage 
between them. The free passage is considerably 
restricted and one-half to five-eighths of the 
channel width being taken up by the obstacles. 
The floor in the free passage is usually flat, 
although small bottom obstacles may be used. 
The wide spacing of the pair of obstacles along 
the channel gives the fish pass the hydraulic 
function of a pool and jet type fish pass, but 
since the pools are divided by the central flow, 
they do not afford much of a resting place except 
to the smaller fish. When the Denil type is 
compared with the paired obstacles fish pass, the 
ratio of preference is 5 : 1 in favour of Denil type. 
Cat-fish does not prefer the paired obstacles fish 
pass. 




# # -p—^? 
A-^ ^ ^ 



Fig. 2 Paired Obstacle Type Fish Pass 

4.2.1.2 Alternate obstacle fish pass 

Alternate obstacle fish pass ( see Fig. 3 ) consists 
in general of a straight rectangular channel with 
obstacles or balTles placed alternatively along the 
sides producing a jet deflection in the horizontal 
plane. The flow is confined to zig-zag path which 
is much longer than the fish pass. This type of 
fish pass is not quite satisfactory. A type of this 
fish pass with a reasonable slope of say 1 in 4 
is shown in Fig. 3. 



7T 



Jk. 



'7 



^. 




Fig. 3 Alternate Obstacle Type Fish Pass 

4.2.2 Pool and Weir Type 

The fish ladder of this type ( see Fig. 4 ) usually 
consists of a series of pools with small drops in 
water surface at the cross walls. Drops in water 
surface are generally about 3 metre, but could 
be as great as 0'6 m at short ladders where only 
a few jumps arc necessary. Long ladders are often 
provided with intermediate rest pools. The 
migratory fish jump from one step to the other. 




Fig. 4 Pool ai^d Wfir Type Fish Pass 

4.2.3 Pool and Orifice Type 

Sometimes the entire flow between the pools is 
passed through a submerged orifice, and the lish 
ascend from pool to pool through the orifices. 
These are of two types: (a) Coil type, and (b) 
Submerged orifice type ( see Fig. 5 and 6). 




Fig. 5 Coil Type Fish Pass 




\T7f~ltzzL 



Fig. 6 Pool and Submerged Orifice 
Type Fish Pass 

When the obstacles have submerged orifices, the 
fish generally prefer to use them, thus avoiding 
exposure. 

4.2.4 Pool and Jet Type 

This is similar to the pool and orifice type except 
that the orifice extends over the full height nf the 
bailie in the form of a vertical slot rather than a 
submerged orifice. 

In negotiating an overfall the fish usually swim 
up the falling jet. 

4.2.5 Denil Fish Pass 

The Denil or channel type of fish pass consists of 
a straight channel with closely spaced baffles set 
at an angle with the axis of the channel. The 
energy of the water flowing down the steep 
flume is dissipated by the closely spaced baffles 
or vanes on the sides and bottom, thereby 
causing part of the flow to turn back on itself. 
The velocity of the water turned by the vanes 
meets the velocity of the main flow in the central 
part of the fish pass, which results in reduction 
in velocity. It is equally effective as alternate 
obstacle fish pass (see 4.2.1.2 ). 

4.2.5.1 The Denil fish puss shown in Fig. 7 is a 
simple arrangement. It is a channel having bottom 
baffles formed from oblique and perpendicular 
parts. The system has proved quite efficient. 
The velocities in the channel are extremely 
moderate. This simple symmetrical fish pass can 
be used for shallow depths. 



IS 13877: 1993 



4.2.5.2 Modification of the Denil fish pass having 
parallel bailies at the sides, placed at an angle 
with the side walls and the bottom shown in 
Fig. 8 has proved to be very efficient. 

4.2.5.3 Another modified Denil fish pass, shown 
in Fig. 9 has been evolved out from a series of 
laboratory experiments. It has been seen that this 
fish pass is not affected by head and tall water 
conditions as long as the fish can enter the fish 
pass and sufficient water is flowing. Strong 
overtopping does not reduce its effectiveness. 



5.6 Typical details of fish pass are shown in 

Fig, 10. 

6 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 The dimension of the fish pass, supply of 
water and grade would have to be suitably 
adjusted to reduce the turbulence in the compart- 
ments to the point where the fish variety would 
not become fatigued. The following points may 
serve as guidelines in a satisfactory design of a 
fish pass. 




B^ 



Fig. 7 Deml iypb (Small) msh pass 
( Alternative-I ) 



J3k 



~^T^ W W VI - 




Fig. 8 Denil Type (Small) Fish Pass 
( Alternative- II ) 



ISf 




Fig. 9 Denil Type ( Small ) Fish Pass 
( Alternative-!!! ) 

5 SELECTION OF TYPE 

5.1 The selection of the type of fish pass, either 
a fish lock or fish ladder ( any sub type ) depends 
on many considerations including economy, but 
the prime consideration is the suitability or 
attraction to the migratory fish. The fisheries 
department has to be invariably consulted before 
the structure is selected and planned. 

5.2 Hydraulic model studies may be got conduct- 
ed for selection of the appropriate type of fish 
pass and to formulate its design. 

5.3 The Demi type of fish pass which incorporate 
the ideas of energy dissipation is generally adapt- 
able to any particular set of local conditions and 
requirements. Alternative types also should be 
considered and compared for economy and 
attraction to fish. 



5.4 Paired obstacle fish pass adapts itself to a 
considerable range o[ iiead water elevation. 



6.1.1 The entrance should be well submerged at 
all stages of water when the fish are seeking 
ascent through it. 

6.1.2 if the now from a fish pass is small com- 
pared to flow in the river, an auxiliary water 
supply may be required to increase the velocity 
of How out of the fish entrance for the purpose 
of attracting the fish more readily. 

6.1.3 Vertical Slot Baffle Type 

Ascent by fish is possible at any depth of the 
fish pass. Depending on rate of migration, the 
pool capacity should be adequately provided to 
reduce fish stress Approximately 0" 1 1 3 m 3 of 
space is required for fish movement of major 
carp of 150 mm length. The slot width should be 
adjusted in relation to the sizes of fish. A 
minimum 300 mm slot width is regarded as 
sufficient for free entry of big fish. The larger 
the slot width, the larger the pool size necessary 
to cushion and dissipate the energy of the 
increased rate of flow passing through the slot. 

6.1.4 Pool Capacity 

The pool capacity may be determined by using 

the following expression: 

60 r 

V — pool capacity in m 3 , 

v — volume required per fish in m s , 

C — fish pass capacity in numbers of 
fish per hour, and 

r = rate of ascent in number of pools 
per minute. 

The size of fish pass depends on the available 
volume of water, the number of fish expected to 
use the fish pass, size, speed and kind of species 
which will use the lis!..: pass. 



where 



5.5 Where the majority of fish is of the cat-fish 
variety, Denil type may be advantageous. An 
alternative obstacle type may be preferable for 
quill black fish variety. 



6.1.5 The rate of migration through fish pass may 
be considered in the range of 2 to 5 minutes per 
700 mm rife of fish pass, for bigger sizes of 
riverine fishes. 



IS 13877 : 1993 









Fig. 10 Typical Sectional Elevation of a Fish Pass in a Barrage 




SECTION 



PLAN 

Fig. 10A Detail of 'A* 



< 

> 



i1 fABJlAlIB- 







^-— 




JB 










I 


> 






CC 


< 


3tt 




a 


* 






a 


u. 






< 










X 






t 


o _ 


34 




X 









X 


t£ 






^ «C 


X 






s^ 3 


t- 


3i 




^ , 


' 






28 




OPERATING L 



r *dt- 



wMj 



■H 



30 60 90 i20 

rvPlCAL RIVER DISCHARGE IN CUMCCS- 



Fro. It Typical Stage Discharge Curve 

6.1.6 Head Difference between Pool 

The head loss per pool may be varied to decrease 
flow and check turbulence. For smaller pools 
( 1 800 mm X 2 400 mm or so ) the head per 
baffle should be 200 cm, while for larger pools 
( 3 000 mm < 3 600 mm ) elevation difference 
between pools may be kept 300 mm. 



fe.1.7 Fish Pass Gradient 

The fish'pass gradient should preferably be 1:10* 
so as to ensure a flow velocity not exceeding 
1 800 mm per sec in any portion of fish pass. 

General practice is to provide average velocity of 
600 to 900 mm/sec in each pool. 

6.1.8 Spacing of Baffles 

To check the number of baffles required, it is 
desirable to draw correctly a set of headwater 
and tailwater curves (see Fig. II ). To do this, 
the elevations of the water surface at the upstream 
end of the fish pass and the downstream end are 
determined from the water surface profiles at 
various rates of discharge (see Fig. 12). The 
maximum distance between these two curves will 
guide in deciding the number of bailies required 
to be placed in the fish pass to overcome this 
head. 

6.1.9 Pool depths usually vary from about I m 
at small ladders to about 2 m at large ladders. 

6.1.10 At weirs on small streams, pools may be 
from 1*25 m to 2'5 m wide and 2 to 3 m long. At 
weirs on large rivers, pools may be 6 m to 12 m 
wide, but never more than 6 m long. 



IS 13877 : 1993 



3 
§ 

■it 

d 



J©T 



tffi 



\ 






^Cv 



— FISH Li,' - rtANCE 



90 1*0 
DISTANCE lM I 



Fig. 12 Typical Water Surface Profile 



6.1.11 Length of Fish Pass in Barrages 

The length of the fish pass should be considered 
from the point of entrance downstream to a place 
above the barrage where relatively calm water 
with low velocity is available, which will not 
sweep away the fish passing through the fish 
pass. 

7 REGULATION 

7.1 The upper end of the fish pass should be 
provided with regulating arrangements so that 



the" quantity of fish admitted can be controlled- 
Otherwise, the compartments would be unduly 
ftooded^during high water periods and insufficient 
supplies during low water periods. 



7.2 Automatic regulation may be provided where 
the variation of water level is not too great, by 
the provision of a series of compartments with 
apertures through the bottom of the dividing 
partitions, the dimensions of the apertures being 
reduced in each successive partition commencing 
at the inlet. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act. 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS tor conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no 
changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of 
Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of * BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions*. Comments on this 
Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc: No. RVD20 (101) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktoia 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Telegrams : Mannksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 



J331 01 31 

(331 13 75 



37 84 99, 37 85 61 
37 86 26, 37 86 62 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Mfanakalaya, E9 M1DC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



J53 38 43, 53 16 40 
)53 23 84 

f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

1632 92 95, 632 78 58 

1632 78 91. 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKMOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printnide, New Delhi, India 



