**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10974-2 (1984) : Code for hygienic conditions for 

production^ transport, storage and distribution of 

indigenous milk products. Part 2: DAHI [FAD 15: Food 
Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vf ijii^s^yiis^ i s:>&^ nT¥seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^i^Vii^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 10974 ( Part 2 ) 1984 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 2 DAHt 



UDC fi37'l/'3'0O4'3/-4 : 61 3'6 




© Copyright 19S4 

|NDlA>t STANDARDS INSTItUTlOW 

MANAK DHAVAN< 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAf=AR MARO 

MEW DBLHl U0003 

Q^ 3 November 1984 



IS: 10974 ( Part 2 ). 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 2 DAHI 

Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, AFDC 36 

Chairman Representing 

Dr a. N. Rai Chowdhury National Institute of Communicable Diseases 

( DGHS ). New Delhi 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
TO THE Government of India ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. p. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Izatnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Dr ( Shrimati ) Indira Chakraborty All India Institute of Hygiene & Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Shri Om P. Dhamija Export Inspection Council of India. New 

Delhi 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 
Executive Health Officer Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 

Bombay 
Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Col O. p. Kapoor Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri Thiru S. Kasturi Government Analyst to the Government of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri S. J. Kekobad Cadbury India Ltd, Bombay 

Maj-Gen Kewal Krishna Directorate General Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi 
Col N. L. Sachdeva ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in pan by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS : 10974 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 

Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr ( Shrimati ) R. Sankaran 



Representing 



Defence Food Research Laboratory, Ministry 
of Defence (R&D), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati ) D. Vijaya Rao ( Alternate ) 



Dr N. K. Sen 
Shri G, D. Sharma 

Dr B. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
CoL L. R. Sharma 

Dr a. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. A. SiDDiQi 



Northern Railway, New Delhi 
Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, New 
Delhi 

Health Department, Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi, Delhi 



Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & 
Fats, Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, 
New Delhi 
Shri S. M. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR), 

Karnal 
Dr S. C. Sarma ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. a. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Agharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member > 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. K. Grover 
Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcommittee^ AFDC 36 : 5 

Convener 
Dr R. S. Singh 
Members 



National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 



Agricultural Marketing Adviser 
TO the Government of India 
Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. p. Bhalla 



Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
Faridabad 



Indian Veterinary Research Institute { ICAR ). 
Izatnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 



Dr S. N. Brahme 

Dr D. N. Gore ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. R. Choudhuri 



Shri C. T. Dwarakanath 



Deonar Abbatoire, Bombay 

Department of Food Technology and 
Bio-chemical Engineering, Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 

Central Food Technological Research 
Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 10974 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 2 DAHI 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 5 March 1984, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Indigenous milk products, such as KHOA, KHOA based sweets, 
DAHI, CHHANA and RASOGOLLA are produced in large quantities in 
India. It has been often observed that proper hygienic conditions are 
not maintained in production, transport, storage and distribution of 
these indigenous milk products and there is considerable scope for impro- 
ving the hygienic conditions in these respects. Unless proper hygienic 
norms are adopted, the consumption of such indigenous milk products 
may by a potential health hazard to the consumer. 

0.3 As the process of production, handling, transport, storage and 
distribution of the various indigenous milk products differ widely, codes 
of hygienic conditions for different milk products are being published in 
parts. The Part 1 covers KHOA and KHOA based sweets, Part 3 
Covers CHHANA and CHHANA based sweetmeats, Part 4 covers 
KULFI, and Part 5 covers SHRI KHAND. 

0.4 DAHIis manufactured by lactic fermentation of milk by single or 
mixed strains of lactic acid bacteria or by lactic fermentation accompani- 
ed by alcholic fermentation by yeast. In India, production and consump- 
tion of DAHI, throughout the season is very common. Since the product 
contains most of the essential nutrients of milk, it provides an ideal 
medium for contamination with bacteria. It is, therefore, felt necessary 
to take adequate precautions, to protect the product from all sources of 
contamination during production, storage and distribution. This standard 
provides guidelines for maintaining optimum hygienic conditions in 
production, storage and distribution of DAHI, 



IS : 10974 ( Part 2 ) . 1984 

0.5 It is expected that this standard would be of considerable assistance 
to local health authorities in enforcing proper hygienic conditions in 
the interest of public health. 

0,6 This code is subjected to the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Acty 1954 and rules framed thereunder as amended from 
time to time and other local regulations. 

0.7 While preparing this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from the National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code { Part 2 ) specifies the hygienic conditions and hygienic 
practices required to be adopted in the manufacture, packaging, storage, 
distribution and sale of DAHL 

2. DAHI MANUFACTURING PLANT 
2.1 Premises 

2.1.1 DAHI should not be manufactured or stored in any open shed 
or in an unenclosed place. 

2.1.2 The building in which DAHI is manufactured should be of 
permanent nature and should be located in a clean and healthful loca- 
lity far away from cattle sheds, open sewage drains or other places 
likely to breed flies and mosquitoes. 

2.1.3 Separate rooms of sufficient size should be provided for main- 
tenance of starter cultures, manufacture and storage of DAHI, washing 
and sterilization of containers and utensils and storage of raw materials 
and other requisites. 

2.1.4 The room used for culture maintenance shall be fitted with 
germicidal lamp, gas burners and other facilities required in a bacterio- 
logical laboratory for handling pure cultures. 

2.1.5 The floors of the rooms shall be constructed of concrete or 
other equally impervious and easily washable materials. The floor shall 
be smooth, suitably sloped for drainage of water and provided with 
trapped drains [ IS : 651-1980* or IS : 771 ( Part 1 ) - 1971t ]. 



'Specification for salt glazed stone ware pipes and fittings (fourth revision ). 

fSpecification for glazed fire-clay sanitary appliances: Part 1 General require- 
ments ( second revision ), 



IS : 10974 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 

2.1.6 The manufacturing unit shall be adequately lighted and venti- 
lated keeping in mind the number of workers, their working hours, 
their hours of work and nature of operation. Ventilation and lighting 
shall also be in accordance with the Factories Act, 1948, amended up to 
date. For guidance for proper lighting [ see IS : 3646 ( Part 2 ) - 1966*]. 
Proper ventilation is essential to prevent condensation and drippage. 
Exhaust fans shall be provided where neccssary- 

2.1.7 The manufacturing room shall be made fly-proof, rodent-proof 
and bird-proof and should be provided with self-closing double doors. 
The doors and windows should be covered with fly-proof wire-mesh, 
and they should open outwards. 

2.1.8 The rooms and the area surrounding the factory building should 
be kept clean and dust free. 

2.2 water Supply — See IS : 4251-i967t. 

2.3 The effluents shall be disposed in a manner which is not detrimental 
to the hygienic conditions in the Z>i4/r/ manufacturing unit and its sur- 
roundings. The eflluents shall not be let ofiF on road or in the open 
outside the dairy premises. 

2.4 Equipment 

2.4.1 The DAHI factory shall use standard and approved types of 
equipment for receiving and storing raw milk, reconstituting dry milk 
powders, pasteurization of raw milk, heat treatment of milk for prepa- 
ring bulk cultures and for carrying out fermentation and storage of 
DAHL 

2.4.2 The equipment should be constructed and installed in such a 
manner as to facilitate efficient cleaning and sterilization and easy 
dismantling and assembling. The material used for the equipment 
should be resistant to corrosion or protected against corrosion. 

2.4.3 All materials used for construction of those surfaces of equip- 
ment which come into contact with the DAHI shall be non-toxic 
( cadmium, lead, copper and its alloys shall not be used ). The use 
of galvanized sheets shall be minimum. All gasketing and packing 
materials shall be non-porous and non-absorbent. 

2.4.4 Surface coolers should be provided with metal shields for 
protection from aerial contamination. All vats and tanks should have 
proper covers. 

•Codcof practice for interior illumination: Part 2 Schedule for value of illumi- 
nation and glare index. 

tQuality tolerances for water for processed food industry. 



K : 10974 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 

2.4.5 All piping used for conducting milk or reconstituted milk should 
be sanitary milk piping of a type which can easily be dismantled for 
cleaning and sterilization and should have smooth uncorroded surfaces 
(see IS: 3382-1965*). 

2.4.6 All equipments should be installed, maintained and operated 
in accordance with public health regulations that may be prescribed. 

2.5 Containers and Utensils 

2.5.1 All multi-service containers and utensils used for handling milk, 
reconstituted milk and DAHI should be constructed of corrosion 
resistant material, should have no dents or open seams, should be 
cleaned and sanitized easily ( see IS : 5253-19691 ). 

2.5.2 Caps, single service containers and spoons used for DAHI 
should be purchased only from approved sources. 

2.6 Cleaning and Sterilization of Equipment and Containers 

2.6.1 Adequate facilities for the cleaning and sterilization of equip- 
ment and containers should be provided in a separate room including 
clean water, sinks, wash up tanks for holding detergent solutions, 
suitable containers for chemical sterilants, steaming chest or jets and 
arrangements for steam and hot water ( see IS : 5253-1969t ). 

3. INGREDIENTS USED IN PREPARATION OF DAHI 

3.1 Milk used for manufacture of I>^^/ should be of good bacteria- 
logical quality. All milk and fluid milk products received at the 
factory should be pasteurized within one hour after receipt and cooled 
to a temperature of 50°C and maintained at that temperature until 
processed. 

3.2 Dry milk powder should be as fresh as possible and free from 
rancidity and off flavours. 

3.3 Standardization of milk for DAHI making should be done prior 
to pasteurization treatment. 

3.4 Standardized pasteurized milk should be cooled to the desired 
temperature of incubation and stored in a clean and sanitized covered 
vat until inoculated with starter organisms. 



•Specification for stainless steel milk pipes and fittings. 
tGuidelines for cleaning and sterilizing dairy equipment. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 

4. PREPARATION OF STARTER CULTURE 

4.1 Pure cultures of starters shall be obtained from an approved culture 
collection centre in the form of coagulated milk culture or as freeze- 
dried culture or dry powder culture. Such culture shall be used for 
preparation of intermediate and bulk cultures. 

4.2 Transfer of cultures from the original stock to a larger volume of 
milk for propagation should be carried out under strict aseptic pre- 
cautions in a room exclusively set apart for culture maintenance. 

4.3 Intermediate and bulk cultures shall be prepared from fresh skim 
milk or freshly reconstituted skim milk which has been heat treated 
by free flowing steam for 30 minutes or to a minimum temperature of 
86°C for 30 minutes and then cooled. 

4.4 Milk processed as indicated above should be inoculated with pure 
culture of starter organisms ( single or mixed cultures ) and incubated 
at 25°C for 16 hours. During this period it should be protected from 
external contamination. 

5. ADDITION OF BULK CULTURE TO MILK 

5.1 Desired volume of bulk culture ( 1 to 2 percent ) shall be trans- 
ferred to pasteurized and tempered milk in the vat, observing all precau- 
tions to avoid external contamination during inoculation. 

5.2 The vessels used for transferring the culture should be cleaned and 
sanitized prior to use by washing with a suitable sanitizer or by 
exposing the vessels to flowing steam ( see IS : 5253-1969* ). 

5.3 The strainer used for breaking the clumps of DAHI culture should 
be cleaned and sanitized prior to use. 

5.4 The plunger or stirrer used for mixing the milk and the starter 
shall be cleaned and sanitized prior to use, 

6. CONTAINERS USED FOR FILLING INOCULATED MILK 

6.1 DAHI bottles or containers used for filling up of the inoculated 
milk should be cleaned and sterilized. Similar treatment should be 
given to dispensers also. 

6.2 Automatic bottle fillers used for filling inoculated milk shall be 
cleaned and sanitized by free flowing steam prior to use ( see IS : 5253- 
1969"" ) 

6.3 Bottles or containers in which inoculated milk has been filled shall 
be covered with suitable lids immediately after filling. 

♦Guidelines for cleaning and sterilizing dairy equipment. 



15 : 10974 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 

6.4 Milk mixed with the starter organisms shall on no account be 
exposed to external contamination. 

6.5 Bottles and containers filled with inoculated milk and suitably 
covered with lids for preparation of DAHI shall be incubated for 

16 hours at 25°C in an incubator. 

6.6 DAHI prepared as above shall be stored at a temperature of 4*5°C 
until distributed to consumers. 

7. OVERFLOW AND SPILLAGE 

7.1 Product drip or overflow or spilled milk culture or DAHI shall be 
discarded. 

8. RETURNED DAHI 

8.1 DAHIy which has been returned in broken and open containers after 
distribution shall be discarded. 

9. TRANSPORT AND DISTRIBUTION OF DAHI 

9.1 All vehicles used for the transportation of DAHI should be so 
constructed and operated as to protect their contents from exposure 
to extraneous contamination. 

9.2 No other material should be loaded on the same vehicle in which 
DAHI bottles or containers are transported. 

9.3 Suitable arrangements should be made to keep the DAHI in bulk 
containers or retail packings at 4'5°C until they are distributed. All 
precautions should be taken to prevent contamination of the contents 
during distribution. 

10. ITINERANT VENDORS 

10.1 Plants or factories manufacturing DAHI should engage only 
licensed vendors and hawkers for selling their product in the market 
or in public places. 

10.2 The vendors should be allowed to transport and sell DAHI only in 
factory-packed containers. 

11. STORAGE AND SALE OF DAHI IN RESTAURANTS AND 
CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS 

11.1 Restaurants, catering establishments, HALWAIS, sweetmeat shops 
and other selling outlets, which store and sell DAHI in retail to 
customers must be fully licensed for the purpose and fulfil all the 
hygienic requirements prescribed by the appropriate authorities in 
respect of public catering places. 

S 



IS: 10974 ( Part 2 ). 1984 

11.2 The floor and drains of the premises and every bench counter, 
stall or other place where DAHI is stored or handled for sale should 
be washed and cleaned everyday using an odourless bactericidal solu- 
tion such as quaternary ammonium compound. There should be 
sufficient amount of clean water and detergents for cleaning of utensils 
and arrangements for toilet and washing of hands and for disposal of 
waste and used cups and spoons. 

11.3 Adequate cold storage facilities shall be provided at all distribution 
points. 

11.4 As far as possible, DAHI should be sold in their original factory 
filled containers. If DAHI is stored in bulk and portions removed 
for filling into cups to be served to customers, all precautions should be 
taken to prevent extraneous contamination of tht product. 

12. HYGIENIC PRACTICES 

12.1 The manufacturing factory or plant shall be so located that no 
sanitary conveniences should either be within or communicate directly 
with the factory/plant. 

12.2 The walls, ceilings, flooring, etc, of the factory and the stall shall 
be kept in proper state of repairs, and painted and cleaned regularly. 

12.3 The factory and stall shall not be used as a living place. 

12.4 Refuse or liquid waste shall not be deposited or allowed to be 
accumulated in the premises. 

12.5 No person should touch DAHI with his hands during filling into 
cups and when subsequently serving to the customers. 

12.6 DAHI cups and spoons and other single service containers used 
for dispensing DAHI should be kept, in a clean container. Single ser- 
vice containers should not be re-used for refilling DAHL 

12.7 Glass cups and other multi-service containers should be cleaned 
and sanitized effectively before use. 

12.8 DAHI scoops or other appliances used for dispensing DAHI into 
cups should be kept immersed in bactericidal solution or periodically 
rinsed in hot water maintained at a temperature of at least SO^'C. 

13. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

13.1 Employee hygiene should be as given in IS : 10974 (Part 1) - 1984*. 

♦Code for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and distribution 
of indigenous milk products: Part I KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 



IS :1Q974( Parti) -1984 

( Continued from page 2) 

Members Representing 

Dr B. N. Ghosh All India Institute of Hygiene and Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Dr S. p. Mukhopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. C. Ghoshal Central Health Education Bureau ( DGHS ), 

NcwD^lhi 
Dr M. N, Gurnani Bombay Municipal Corporation, Dombay 

Joint Director ( Prevention of Delhi Administration, Delhi 

Food Adulteration ) 
Col O. p. Kapur Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Dr V. V. Karnik Brooke Bond India Limited, Aura igabad 

Dr S. J. Pardikar ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. K. Nandi Food and Nutrition Board, Minis ry of Food 

and Civil Supplies, New Delh 
Shri Harpal Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. V. R. C. Panicker / National Environmental Engineering Research 

' Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 

Dr ( Shrimati ) A. S. Gadkari ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ravi Krishna Britannia Industries Ltd, New De-hi 

Secretary Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Cql K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kailash Vyas Kaira Distt Cooperative Milk Producers' 

Union Limited, Anand 
Dr Brijesh Narayan ( Alternate ) 



10 



