**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  1393  (1961) :  Code  of  practice  for  training  and  testing 
of  oxy  acetylene  welders  [MTD  11:  Welding  General] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


Indian  Standard 


CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR  TRAINING  AND 
TESTINd  OF  OX Y- ACETYLENE  WELDERS 

(  Firsi  Reprint  SEPTF.MRFi^  19B4  ) 


V 


UDC    621  7^1-565  O04'2 


i 


illiit 


:-tif;/-;iiVi^j'i,yvif;f;:l:-.. 


W^P 


yiW        INDIAN     STANDARDS    INSTITUTION 

MA]>fAK    BHAVAN,    9    P^nAOilft     SH^H    ^A.FAR    MAHC 
HEW  DEI  HI     IJOOOJ 


■mS:!^! 


iihiHHJii^ll^^lW 


NQV^mb$r  1962 


IS:  1393-  1961 


Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR  TRAINING  AND 
TESTING  OF  OXY-ACETYLENE  WELDERS 


Welding   General  Sectional  Committee,  SMDC  14 

Chairman  Representing 

Shbi  K.  K.  Rao  Ministry  of  Railways 

Members 
Shki  K.  D.  Agarwal 

Shki  F.  V.  Badami 
Shri  N,  C.  Bagchi 
Shri  p.  K.  V.  Challam 

Shri  M.  Mitra  {Alternate) 
Shri  B.  N.  Das 
Mr*  a.  p.  Forsyth 
Shri  C.  P.  Ghosh 
Shri  N,  K.  Ghosh 

Shri  M.  K.  Mookerjee  {Alternate) 
Shbi  R.  Ghosh 

Shri  J.  Muliyil  {Alternate) 
Joint  Director  Research  (  M  &  C  ) 

Shri  V.  R.  Subramanian  {Alternate 
Shri  B.  N.  Majumdar 

Shri  Harnam  Singh  {Alternate) 
Shbi  D.  R.  Malik 

Shri  A.  Soundraraj  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr.  Gokalananda  Mukherjee 
Shri  S.  V.  Nadkarni 

Shri  P.  S.  Visvanath  (Alternate) 
Shri  N.  V.  Pandit 
Shri  N.  B.  Rama  Reddy 
Representative 
Shri  B.  G.  Sastry 
Shri  S.  N.  Sen  Gupta 
Shri  J.  P.  Singla 
Shri  T.  N.  Velu 
Shri  B.  S.  Krishnamachar, 
Deputy  Director  (S  &  M)  (  Secretary  ) 


Directorate   ot    Technical    Development    [  Ministrv   of   Defence 

(CGDP)] 
Development  Wing,  Ministry  of  Commerce  &  Industry 
Government  Test  House,  Calcutta 
Asiatic  Oxygen  &  Acetylene  Co.  Ltd.,  Calcutta 

National  Metallurgical  Laboratory  (CSIR),  Jamshedpur 
The  Aluuiinium  Manufacturing  Company  Private  Ltd.,  Calcutta 
Engineer-in-Chief  is  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 
Tata  Engineering  &  Locomotive  Co.  Ltd.,  Tatanagar 

Indian  Oxygen  Limited,  Calcutta 

Ministry  of  Railways 
) 
Inspection  Wing,    Directorate   General  of  Supplies  &  Disposals 
(  Ministry  of  Works,  Housing  &  Supply ) 

Directorate  General  of  Ordnance  Factories  (  Ministry  of  Defence  ), 
Calcutta 


Integral  Coach  Factory,  Perambur 

J,  B.  Advani-Oerlikon  Electrodes  (  Private )  Ltd., 


Bombay 


Chittaranjan  Locomotive  Works,  Chittaranjan 
Public  Works  Department,  Madras 
Central  Boilers  Board  {  Ministry  of  Works,  Housing  & 
Nickel  Information  Bureau  {  Private )  Ltd.,  Bombay 
Boilers  Sectional  Committee,  EDC  40,  ISI 
Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 
Hindustan  Shipyard  Ltd.,  Visakhapatnani 
Director,  ISI  {  Ex-officin  Member ) 


Supply  ) 


Panel  for  Code  of  Practice  for  Training  and  Testing  of  Oxy-Acetylcne 
Welders,  SMDC  14/P4 
Shri  R.  Ghosh  Indian  Oxygen  Limited,  Calcutta 


INDIAN     STANDARDS     INSTITUTION 

MANAK       BHAVAN.       9       BAHADUR       SHAH       /AFAR      MARG 
NKW  DKUri   110002 


18:1393*1961 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

0.  Foreword      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...         4 

1.  Scope  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...         6 


PART  I    GENERAL 

2.  Terminology  ... 

3.  Symbols 

4.  Material 

5.  Selection  of  Trainees  ... 

6.  Length  of  Course,   Hours  of  Instruction 
Period  of  Instruction 

7.  Record  Book 


AND  Trial 


6 
7 

7 
7 

8 
8 


PART  II    EQUIPMENT  AND  TESTING  FACILITIES 
AT  THE  TRAINING  ESTABLISHMENT 

8.  Apparatus      ...               ...               ...  ...  ...  8 

9.  Supervision    ...               ...               ...  ...  ...  9 

10.  Reference  Materials    ...               ...  ...  ...  9 

11.  Qualifications  and  Duties  of  Instructor  ...  ...  9 

PART  111    COURSE  OF  INSTRUCTION 

12.  General         ...  ...  ...  ...  ...        12 

13.  Instruction  in  Welding  Practice  ...  ...        12 

14.  Exercises  —  Section  I  Welding  of  Mild  Steel  Sheets  up 
TO  3*15  mm  in  Thickness  and  Tubes  up  to  60  mm  in 
Diameter  and  Wall  Thickness  up  to  1-60  mm  ...        12 

15.  Exercises  ~  Section  II  Welding  of  Cast  Iron,  Alumi- 
nium, Brass  and  Manual  Oxygen  Cutting  and  Flame 
Gouging  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...        21 

16.  Assessment  of  Check  Test  Welds  in  Sections  I  and  II         29 

17.  Instruction  in  Welding  Theory  ...  ...  ...        31 


IS:  1393-  1961 


PART  IV    TESTS  FOR  WELDERS 

18.  General 

19.  Initial  Qualification  Tests 

20.  Re-Test  for  Initial  Qualification  Test 

21.  Annual  Tests 

22.  Periodic  Control  Test 

23.  Re-Tests  for  Annual  Test  and  Periodic  Control  Test 

24.  Position  for  Test  Welds 

Appendix  A    Recommended  Form  for  Record  Rook 
Appendix  B    Recommended  Design  of  Positionin(;  Equipment 


Appendix  C 

Appendix  D 
Appendix  E 
Appendix  F 

Appendix  G 
Appendix  H 

Appendix  J 


Accessories  and  Equipment  Recommended  for 
Training  Establishment  for  Welders 

Recommended  Form  of  Trainee  Progress  Chart 

Recommended  Syllabus  for  Training  Course 

Detailed  Suggestions  Covering  Each  Section 
AND  Group  of  Exercises 

Recommended  Safety  Rules 

Suggested    Methods    for    Preparing    Etched 
Specimens     ... 

Equivalent  fps  Values  of  Metric  Values  Used 
in  the  Standard 


page 

33 
33 
45 
45 
47 
47 
47 
48 
52 

55 
58 
61 

63 
74 

75 
77 


IS:  1393-  1961 

Indian  Standard 

CODE  OF  PRACTICE  FOR  TRAINING  AND 
TESTING  OF  OXY-ACETYLENE  WELDERS 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Insti- 
tution on  14  August  1961,  after  the  draft  finahzed  by  the  Welding  Gene- 
ral Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Structural  and  Metals 
Division  Council. 

0,2  The  Planning  Commission  of  India,  while  investigating  the  problems 
of  shortage  of  steel  in  India,  concluded  that  greater  development  in  the  use 
of  welded  construction  would  contribute  appreciably  to  the  economic  and 
efficient  use  of  steel.  The  use  of  welding  in  India  has  lagged  far  behind  the 
use  of  this  method  of  fabrication  in  other  countries.  On  the  recommenda- 
tions of  the  Planning  Commission,  the  Indian  Standards  Institution  launched 
a  Steel  Economy  Project  to  promote  efficiency  and  economy  in  the  use  of 
steel  for  fabrication  purposes  and  to  introduce  measures  to  encourage 
the  more  rapid  development  of  the  welding  industry  in  India. 

0.3  Oxy-acetylene  welding  is  used  on  the  whole  range  of  commercial 
ferrous  and  non-ferrous  metals  and  alloys.  Materials;  such  as  high- 
carbon  and  alloy  steels,  can  be  welded  by  oxy-acetylene  welding  provided 
the  joints  if  required,  can  be  properly  heat  treated  before  and  after 
welding.  Cast  iron  machinery  frames  30  cm  or  more  thick  at  the  frac- 
ture point  have  been  repaired  by  either  fusion  or  braze  welding  ( non- 
fusion  welding ).  Sound  welds  are  produced  in  other  materials  by  appro- 
priate variations  in  technique,  heat  treating,  pre-heating,  etc.  Generally 
speaking,  oxy-acetylene  welding  is  no  longer  used  in  structural  work  in 
mild  steel,  if  arc  welding  plant  is  available,  except  in  the  case  of  relatively 
thin-gauge  material. 

0.4  Progress  in  the  use  and  acceptance  of  welding  as  a  fabricating  medium 
depends  greatly  upon  the  quahty  of  the  welding  being  done  in  the  country. 
The  value  and  utility  of  welding  are  judged  mainly  on  the  competency 
and  knowledge  displayed  by  the  welder.  The  need  for  men,  more  skilled 
in  the  art  of  welding,  has  led  to  the  establishment  of  these  recommendations 
for  the  training  and  testing  of  welders. 

0.5  With  the  increasing  acceptance  of  welded  fabrication  for  major  struc- 
tures, the  uniform  maintenance  of  a  high  degree  of  proficiency  in  welding 


18:1393-1961 

is  essential  fSr  the  adequate  protection  of  the  public  as  well  as  the  sound 
development  of  the  welding  industry.  In  addition  to  the  initial  quali- 
fication tests  for  judging  the  ability  of  the  trainee,  periodic  re-tests  and 
special  trade  qualification  tests  are  essential  in  maintaining  high  standards 
of  proficiency.  Although  there  is  a  general  agreement  on  the  properties 
to  be  determined  and  test  procedures  to  be  used  in  judging  the  qualifica- 
tions of  a  welder,  there  is  a  certain  divergence  in  the  details  of  the  test 
procedures  and  number  of  tests  required.  The  exercises  and  quahfying 
tests  recommended  in  this  code  are  considered  minimum  for  assuring 
proper  qualifications  for  normal  welding  in  thin  gauge  mild  steel,  sheets 
and  tubes,  aluminium,  brass,  and  cast  iron,  and  will  produce  a  welder 
with  a  degree  of  skill  and  knowledge  that  will  be  of  immediate  value  to 
his  employer  and  he,  by  gaining  experience  on  simple  work,  will  be  able 
to  progress  rapidly  to  work  of  greater  difficulty.  The  exercises  and  quali- 
fying tests  recommended  are  not  intended  to  train  welders  for  special 
types  of  welding,  such  as  welding  of  boilers,  industrial  pipelines,  etc. 
More  stringent  requirements  may  be  necessary  for  qualifying  welders  for  a 
special  type  of  work  if  there  is  a  definite  code,  specification  or  procedure 
control  for  that  type  of  work  or  the  materials  to  be  used. 

0.6  Adequate  training  facilities  and  safe  and  convenient  working  condi- 
tions are  essential  adjuncts  to  the  proper  instruction  of  a  trainee.  This 
code  includes  recommendations  on  the  type  of  equipment  essential  for 
proper  instruction  in  welding.  Basic  rules  for  safety  in  tiie  handling  and 
care  of  equipment  are  also  included.  The  welder  shall  be  made  conscious 
of  economy  in  the  use  of  materials  and  shall  be  capable  and  cognizant 
of  the  need  to  make  the  fullest  use  of  all  filler  rods  and  other  materials  he 
is  working  with. 

0,7  Drawing  upon  the  experience  of  established  training  institutions  in 
India  and  abroad,  this  code  has  been  formulated  with  a  view  to  serving 
as  a  guide  in  organizing  and  planning  the  work  of  the  trainee's  under- 
taking a  course  of  study  in  welding  technique  and  theory.  Furthermore, 
due  weightage  has  been  given  to  the  need  for  international  co-ordination 
among  standards  and  test  procedures  prevailing  in  different  countries 
of  the  world.  These  considerations  led  the  Sectional  Committee  to  derive 
assistance  from  the  following  documents: 

B.S.   1295:1946   Tests   for    Use    in    the    Training    of   Welders. 
British  Standards  Institution. 

AWS  B  2.1-1945  Code  of  Minimum  Requirements    for    Instruc- 
tion OF  Welding  Operators.    American  Welding  Society. 

0.8  Wherever  a  reference  to  any  Indian  Standard  appears  in  this  code, 
it  shall  be  taken  as  a  reference  to  the  latest  version  of  the  standard. 

0.9  All  quantities  and  dimensions  appearing  in  this  standard  have  been 
given  in  metric  system.  Corresponding  fps  values  to  which  the  industry 
has  been  accustomed  are  given  in  Appendix  J  for  information. 


18:1393-1961 


1.  SCOPE 


1.1  This  code  recommends  minimum  requirements  for  a  course  of  instruc- 
tion in  manual  oxy-acetylene  welding  and  cutting  —  as  applicable  to 
light  engineering  industry  (  Section  I )  and  to  general  engineering  industry 
(  Sections  I  and  II )  and  prescribes  certain  standard  tests  comprising  the 
initial  qualification  tests  at  the  training  establishment  and  subsequent 
annual  and  periodic  tests  for  practising  welders. 

Note — Training  for  welding  in  overhead  position  has  been  omitted  from  the 
scope  of  this  Code  in  view  of  its  very  limited  application  in  light  and  general 
engineering  industry. 

1.2  The  principal  objectives  of  the  course  of  instruction  covered' by  the 
code  are: 

a)  to  coach  the  trainee  in  the  fundamental  techniques  and  safe  prac- 
tices of  oxy-acetylene  welding  and  cutting, 

b)  to  give  the  trainee  a  good  understanding  of  the  proper  methods  of 
oxy-acetylene  welding  and  cutting. 

c)  to  enable  the  trainee  to  acquire  enough  skill  in  oxy-acetylene  welding 
and  cutting  to  pass  the  qualification  tests  prescribed  in  this  code,  and 

d)  to  provide  the  trainee  with  a  basic  knowledge  of  the  theory  of 
oxy-acetylene  welding  and  cutting. 

1.2.1  The  course  of  instruction  is  not  expected  to  produce  an  experi- 
enced welder,  but  rather  a  welder  with  enough  skill  and  knowledge  so 
that  he  wiU  be  of  immediate  value  to  industry  as  a  welder  on  less  difficult 
work  and  will  be  able,  by  gaining  experience  in  industry,  to  progress  rapid- 
ly to  work  of  greater  difficulty  and  responsibility. 

1.3  The  standard  tests  prescribed  in  this  code  comprise  the  following: 

a)  Initial  Qualification  Test  —  The  test  which  the  trainee  shall  be 
required  to  pass  before  completing  his  course  of  training.  The 
passing  of  this  test  indicates  that  the  welder  has  enough  basic  skill 
and  knowledge  to  be  of  value  to  industry  as  a  welder;  and 

b)  Annual  and  Periodic  Tests  —  The  check  tests  designed  to  be  applied 
at  regular  intervals  for  ensuring  that  a  welder  actually  engaged 
on  work  has  continued  to  maintain  a  standard  of  proficiency  as 
required  by  the  initial  qualification  test. 

PART  I     GENERAL 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  code,  all  terms  relating  to  oxy-acetylene 
welding  and  cutting,  unless  otherwise  defined  in  this  code,  shall  have  the 
meaning  assigned  to  them  in  IS:  812-1957  Glossary  of  Terms  Relating  to 
Welding  and  Cutting  of  Metals. 


IS:  1393-  1961 

3.  SYMBOLS 

3.1  For  the  purpose  of  this  code,  the  symbols  used,  urxless  otherwise  de- 
fined in  this  code,  shall  have  the  meaning  assigned  to  them  in  IS:  813- 
1956  Scheme  of  Symbols  for  Welding. 

4.  MATERIAL 

4.1  Steel  —  Steel  used  as  parent  metal  for  training  and  testing,  accord- 
ing to  the  provisions  of  this  code,  shall  be  of  general  weldable  quality 
specified  in  *IS:  226-1958  Specification  for  Structural  Steel.  In  the 
case  of  mild  steel  tubes,  only  those  tubes  having  wall  thicknesses  up  to 
1*60  mm  shall  be  used. 

4.2  Cast  Iron  —  Cast  iron  plates  used  as  parent  metal  for  training  and 
testing,  according  to  the  provisions  of  this  code,  shall  conform  to  *IS:  210- 
1950  Specification  for  Grey  Iron  Castings  (  machinable  quality ). 

4.3  Aluminium  —  Aluminium  used  as  parent  metal  for  training  and 
testing,  according  to  the  provisions  of  this  code,  shall  be  of  quality  de- 
signated SIA  or  SIB  or  SIC  as  specified  in  *IS  :  737-1955  Specification 
for  Wrought  Aluminium  and  Aluminium  Alloys,  Sheet  and  Strip  (  For 
General  Engineering  Purposes  ). 

4.4  Brass  —  Brass  used  as  parent  metal  for  training  and  testing,  accord- 
ing to  the  provisions  of  this  code,  shall  be  of  quahtv  as  specified  in 
IS: 410-1959  Specification  for  Rolled  Brass  Plate,  Sheet,  Strip  and  Foil 
( Revised), 

4.5  Filler  Rods  —  Filler  rods  used  for  training  and  all  tests  according 
to  the  provisions  of  this  code,  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of  9.1 
or  9.2  for  welding  of  stieel,  10.1  for  fusion  welding  of  cast  iron,  11.2  for 
welding  of  brass,  11.3  for  bronze  or  braze  welding  (non-fusion  welding) 
of  cast  iron  and  13.3  for  welding  of  aluminium  of  IS:  1278-1958  Specifica- 
tion for  Filler  Rods  and  Wires  for  Gas. Welding. 

4.6  Fluxes  —  Suitable  fluxes,  where  required,  shall  be  used. 

5.  SELECTION  OF  TRAINEES 

5.1  Trainees  selected  to  receive  the  instruction  recommended  in  this  code 
shall  have  the  following  qualifications: 

a)  Ability  to  understand  the  language  of  instruction; 

b)  No  physical  or  mental  disability  that  precludes  safe  operation  of 
welding  equipment  or  interferes  with  full  performance  of  duties 
in  irdustry;  and 

c)  The  minimum  age  requirements  prescribed  in  the  State  and  Cen- 
tral labour  laws  applicable  in  the  State  in  which  the  instruction  is 
conducted. 


♦Under  revision. 


IS:  1393-  1961 

6.  LENGTH  OF  COURSE.  HOURS  OF  INSTRUCTION  AND 
TRIAL  PERIOD  OF  INSTRUCTION 

6.1  Length  of  Instruction  in  Welding  Practice  —  The  instruction 
shall  be  so  organized  that  each  trainee  shall  be  required  to  devote  a  mini- 
mum of  200  hours  for  both  sections  of  the  course  ( see  14  and  15 ),  that  is 
100  hours  for  each  section,  to  actual  welding,  exclusive  of  time  spent  in 
witnessing  demonstrations  by  the  instructor,  preparing  plates  for  weld- 
ing, testing  specimens  and  receiving  instructions  in  welding  theory. 

6.2  Length  of  Instruction  in  Welding  Theory  —  Not  less  than  50  hours 
( 25  hours  for  each  section  )  shall  be  devoted  to  instruction  in  welding 
theory  prescribed  in  Part  III  (  see  17 ). 

6.3  Length  of  Welding  Practice  in  Any  One  Day  —  The  length  of  time 
spent  by  the  trainee  in  actual  welding  practice  in  any  one  day  shall  not 
exceed  seven  hours  with  a  break  of  at  least  half  an  hour  after  the  first 
four  hours. 

6.4  Trial  Period  of  Instruction  —  In  the  beginning  of  the  course,  there 
shall  be  a  trial  or  probationary  period  of  a  week  but  not  exceeding  40  hours, 
the  period  to  be  determined  by  the  training  establishment,  during  which 
the  instructor  shall  observe  the  aptitude  and  interest  of  the  trainee  and 
determine  whether  in  the  interest  of  all  concerned  the  trainee  should  conti- 
nue the  course. 

7.  RECORD  BOOK 

7.1  Upon  completion  of  the  course  and  fulfilment  of  the  requirenients 
prescribed  in  this  code,  the  trainee  shall  be  granted  a  record  book  indi- 
cating that  the  trainee  has  passed  the  tests  prescribed  in  Part  IV.  Further 
these  tests  together  with  the  results  of  the  said  tests  shall  be  listed  on  the 
record  book.  If  the  trainee  has  passed  some  but  not  all  the  initial  quaU- 
fication  tests  prescribed,  the  tests  which  the  trainee  has  not  taken  or  has 
failed  to  pass  shall  be  permanently  indicated  in  the  book. 

7.2  The  record  book  shall  have  additional  pages  for  recording  the  results 
of  annual  tests  taken  by  the  welder.  Additional  pages  may  alsg  be  pro- 
vided for  recording  any  periodic  and  special  tests,  for  example,  welding 
in  special  steels,  pipe  welding,  etc,  which  .the  welder  may  take.  A  re- 
commended form  for  this  book  is  given  in  Appendix  A. 

PArT  li     EQUIPMENT  AND  TESTING  FACILITIES  AT  THE 
TRAINING    ESTABLISHMENT 

8.  APPARATUS 

8.1  Welding  Table  —  Each  trainee  shall  be  provided  with  a  welding 
table  preferably  topped  with  firebrick  ( suggested  type  of  table  is  shown 

8 


IS:  1393-  1961 

in  Fig.  1  ).  The  welding  school  shall  have  an  area  with  sufficient  clear 
floor  space  to  allow  adequate  freedom  of  movement  for  the  trainees  and 
the  instructors  and  placing  of  oxygen  and  acetylene  cylinders  (if  supphes 
from  cylinders  are  used  ). 

8.2  Positioning  Jig  —  Suitable  positioning  jigs  shall  be  provided  to  faci- 
litate the  execution  of  the  welding  tests  prescribed  in  Part  IV.  Suggested 
designs  of  such  equipment  are  given  in  Appendix  B. 

8.3  Equipment  for  Oxy-Acetylene  Welding  and  Cutting  and  Other 
Accessories — The  training  establishm.ent  shall  provide  all  apparatus 
and  equipment  necessary  for  the  safe  and  proper  execution  of  the  welding 
course  prescribed  herein.  A  list  of  accessories  and  equipment  recommend- 
ed for  a  training  establishment  is  given  in  Appendix  C. 

8.4  Filler  Rods  and  Wires  —  There  shall  be  an  adequate  supply  of 
filler  rods  and  wires  of  the  types  and  sizes  required  for  the  exercises  pres- 
cribed in  Part  III. 

8.5  Material  for  Welding  —  An  adequate  supply  of  mJld  steel,  cast 
iron,  aluminium  and  brass  plates  of  the  required  quality  shall  be  provided 
for  the  exercises  prescribed  in  Part  III. 

8.6  Testing  Apparatus  —  The  training  establishment  shall  possess 
apparatus  suitable  for  preparing  and  testing  the  test  specimens  as  pres- 
cribed in  Parts  III  and  IV  or  shall  arrange  for  preparation  and  testing  of 
test  specimens  elsewhere. 

9.  SUPERVISION 

9.1  Number  of  Trainees  per  Instructor  —  Each  shop  class  shall  be 
restricted  to  not  more  than  12  trainees  in  attendance  per  instructor. 

9.2  Record  of  Trainees'  Progress  —  A  record  shall  be  kept  of  each 
trainee's  progress,  showhig  the  number  of  hours  of  individual  practice  and 
the  results  of  all  tests  prescribed  in  Parts  III  and  IV.  A  recommended 
form  of  trainee's  progress  chart  is  given  in  Appendix  D. 

10.  REFERENCE  MATERIALS 

10.1  Outline  of  Course  —  At  the  start  of  the  course,  a  prepared  out- 
line indicating  the  syllabus  of  the  course,  the  tests  required,  and  the  sub- 
jects to  be  covered  in  the  related  instruction  shall  be  made  available  to 
the  trainees.     A  specimen  syllabus  for  tlie  course  is  given  in  Appendix  E. 

10.2  Welding  Publications  —  The  training  establishment  shall  have 
available  for  trainees'  use  suitable  reference  material  on  welding  com- 
prising books,  m.anuals,  periodicals,  codes,  stnndnrds,  etc. 

11.  QUALIFICATIONS  AND  DUTIES  OF  INSTRUCTOR 

li:l  General — The  instructions  prescribed  in  this  code  may  he  given  by  one 
or  more  instructors,  provided  each  instructor  in  welding  practice  possesses 


IS :  1393  -  1961 

rrt 


510 


500 


750 


700  - 
710  - 
PLAN 


..^-1 


r 

150 


L^-^ 


ELEVATION 


^--^J 


Note  1  —  Mild  steel  angle  50  X  50  X  5  mm.     Note  2  ~  Mild  steel  tee  50  X  50  X  5  mm. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  1     Firebrick  Topped  Table  (  Firebricks  not  Shown  ) 

10 


18:1393-1961 

the  qualifications  prescribed  under  11.2,1  and  each  instructor  in  welding 
theory  possesses  the  qualifications  prescribed  under  11.2.2.  In  addition, 
each  instructor  shall  have  the  ability  to  present  effective  demonstrations 
and  explanations  of  those  portions  of  the  course  which  he  is  to  teach. 

11.2  Qualifications  of  Instructor 

11.2.1  Each  instructor  giving  any  portion  of  the  instruction  in  weld- 
ing practice  shall  possess  the  following  qualifications: 

a)  A  minimum  of  three  years'  experience  as  a  welder  or  welding  super- 
visor, of  which  at  least  two  years  shall  have  been  spent  as  manual 
oxy-acetylene  welder ; 

b)  Proven  ability  to  pass  all  the  tests  prescribed  for  trainees  in  Part  IV 
of  this  code; 

c)  A  practical  knowledge  of  the  physical  properties  of  the  metals  and 
the  welding  processes; 

d)  Familiarity  with  the  topics  in  welding  theory  covered  in  Part  III ;  and 

e)  Famiharity  with  the  codes  and  specifications  used  in  welding  and 
capability  to  read  simple  engineering  drawings  relating  to  welding. 

11.2.2  Each  instructor  giving  any  portion  of  the  instruction  in  weld- 
ing theory  ( see  17 )  shall  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  subjects  in 
which   he   gives   instructions. 

11.3  Duties  of  Instructor  —  The  instructional  staff  shall  be  charged  with 
the  responsibility  of  giving  instructions  in  welding  practice  and  welding 
theory,  as  prescribed  in  Part  IIL     The  duties  shall  include: 

a)  Planning  instruction  in  accordance  with  the  course  outlined  in  this 
code  keeping  in  view  the  following  four  basic  steps  of  instruction: 

1)  Preparing  the  trainee  for  new  instruction; 

2)  Using   appropriate   methods    for   presenting   the   new   instruc-  . 
tion  (demonstration,  illustration,  explanation,  discussion,  etc); 

3)  Providing  proper  supervision  and  guidance  to  the  trainee  in 
applying  his  new  knowledge  and  skill;  and 

4)  Supervising  and  checking  tests  assigned  to  trainees, 

b)  Instructing  the  trainee  to  work  safely,  emphasizing  the  training 
estabhshment's  safety  regulations. 

c)  Observing  acceptable  shop  management  practices,  such  as: 

1)  care>   control   and   conservation   of   materials   and   equipment; 
and 

2)  shop  cleanliness  and  orderliness. 

d)  Keeping  attendance  records  and  recording  trainees'  progress. 

11 


IS:  1393-  1961 

PART  ill     COURSE  OF  INSTRUCTION 

12.  GENERAL 

12.1  The  instruction  shall  consist  of  welding  practice  and  lectures  in  weld- 
ing theory.  The  practical  and  theoretical  training  should  be  suitably 
interspersed  and  related  one  to  the  other.  The  training  sliall  start  with 
instruction  in  safety  precautions,  protection  of  person  and  protection  and 
care  of  equipment. 

13.  INSTRUCTION  IN  WELDING  PRACTICE 

13.1  Instruction  in  welding  practice  shall  be  given  by  means  of  a  scries  of 
exercises  which  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  prescribed  in  this  Part. 
The  course  of  instruction  has  been  divided  into  two  sections  as  follows : 

Section  I    — Covering  welding  of  light  gauge  mild  steel  sheets. up 
to  3*15  mm  thick  and  tubes   up   to    60    mm    diameter 
and   wall   thickness   1-60  mm  (which  find  cojisiderable 
use  in  light  engineering  industry ) ;  and 
Section  II  —  Covering  welding  of  cast   iron,   aluminium,   brass  and 
manual  oxygen  cutting  nnd  flame  gouging. 
The   combined   sections   would   cover  the  needs  of  general  engineering 
industry  for  manufacture  and  maintenance  work. 

13.1.1  The  exercises  prescribed  in  the  two  different  sections  shall  be  per- 
formed on  mild  steel,  cast  iron,  aluminium  and  brass,  on  the  thicknesses 
appropriate :to  each  individual  exercise.  The  plates  used  shall  be  reason- 
ably free  from  extraneous  matter,  such  as  rust,  scales,  paint,  etc,  and 
defects  which  adversely  affect  welding.  For  execution  of  each  exercise, 
the  trainee  shall  have  a  welding  unit  for  his  exclusive  use. 

13.1.2  The  importance  of  maintaining  the  correct  flame  characteristics 
as  applicable  to  welding  of  different  metals  to  obtain  welds  of  uniformly 
good  quality  and  the  importance  of  proper  cleanliness,  joint  preparation, 
blow  pipe  and  rod  angles  and  the  use  of  fluxes  ( where  necessary  )  shall 
be  emphasized  during  each  exercise. 

13.1.3  After  completing  each  group  of  exercises  the  trainee  shall  be 
required  to  pass  the  check  tests  prescribed  for  that  group,  designed  to 
demonstrate  whether  he  has  acquired  a  satisfactory  degree  of  skill  in  the 
techniques  covered  by  that  group  of  exercises. 

13.1.4  Detailed  suggestions  covering  each  section  and  group  of  exer- 
cises are  given  in  Appendix  F. 

14.  EXERCISES  —  SECTION  I  WELDING  OF  MILD  STEEL 
SHEETS  UP  TO  315  mm  IN  THICKNESS  AND 
TUBES  UP  TO  60  mm  IN  DIAMETER  AND 

WALL  THICKNESS  UP  TO  1  60  mm 
14.0  Welding  exercises  in  these  groups  shall  be  carried  out  with  a  neutral 
flame. 

12 


18:1393-  1961 


14.1  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  A 


14.1,1  Fitting  up  of  Equipment,  Adjustment  of  Flame  and  Deposition  of 
Weld  Beads  —  Exercises  in  Group  A  shall  be  designed  to  instruct  the 
trainee  to  fit  up  the  equipment,  set  the  gas  pressures,  to  hght  and  adjust 
the  flame  and  to  deposit  beads  of  correct  width  and  build-up  with  1*60  mm 
diameter  mild  steel  filler  rods  and  to  make  butt  welds  in  1*60  mm  mild 
steel  sheet  in  flat  position.  The  following  exercises  shall  be  included  in 
this  group: 

a)  Fitting   up   of   equipment   and   adjustment   of  gas   pressures; 

b)  Lighting  and  adjustment  of  the  flame  —  neutral,  oxidizing  (  excess 
oxygen )  and  reducing  ( excess  acetylene )  flames  { see  Fig.  2,  3 
and  4);  and 

NoTK — ^  The  maintenance  of  a  constant  llame  at  the  desired  adjustment  is 
most  important.  Generally,  for  steel  the  flame  should  be  neutral,  that  is  the 
inner  cone  should  be  sharply  defined  with  a  very  slight  haze  or  flicker  at  the  end 
of  it.  This  haze  or  flicker  provides  ah  *  indicator  *,  which  by  its  disappearance 
will  show  when  the  flame  is  tending  to  become  oxidizing  ( see  Fig.  3  ). 

c)  Bead  welds  without  and  with  filler  rods  in  fiat  position. 


'  WMt«  to  e(u<  CoA« 

•  N«orl]f   Colourl«s« 

-  Blulth  to   Oron^* 


Con« 
Neutral  Zon« 


Ftafflc  M  tc«A  without 
W«M«r*f    Go99)fft 


F(Offl<  ot  »««n  wtth 
w«ldcrH  G099t«« 


Fig.  2     Neutral  Flame 


•  Whltiz    Cona 

-Oron9«   to  Purpliih 


flame  os  smn  wHItout 
W«td4r*«    Go99tM 


OxfdiiIn9  Zon« 


Flome  OS  t<«(\  wtti) 


Fig,  3     Oxidizing  Flame 


-lnt«nte  Whit«  Con« 

-White  or  Colourless 

-Ortln9^  to  Btutsh 


Redtic1n9  Zone 


*^lame   as  seen   without 
Welder's    Go99le* 


Ftame  at  seen    with 
Welder's   Go99les 


Fig.  4     Reducing  Flame 


13 


IS:  1393-  1961 

The  exercises  in  Group  A  shall  be  performed  by  the  forward  welding 
technique  {see  Fig.  5). 

14.1.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  A — No  specific 
tests  are  prescribed  for  this  group.  The  trainee  shall  be  able  to  adjust 
the  flame  to^  the  three  different  conditions.  He  shall  be  able  to  deposit 
beads  with  or  without  filler  rods.  The  bead  welds  made  with  a  filler  rod 
shall  be  straight  and  have  even  build-up  free  from  undercutting  and  shall 
not  show  presence  of  oxidation  or  burning. 

14.2  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  B 

14.2.1  The  exercises  in  Group  B  shall  be  designed  to  instruct  the  trainee 
in  the  technique  of  making  butt  welds  in  1-60  mm  mild  steel  plates  in  flat 


Fig.  5     Forward  Welding 
14 


18:1393-1961 


and  vertical  positions  and  in  3-15  mm  thick  plates  in  tlat  position.  Exer- 
cises on  the  following  types  of  welds  shall  be  included  in  this  group;  which 
shall  be  performed  by  forward  technique: 

Weld  Edge  Preparation 

a)  Butt  welds  in  1-60  mm  mild  steel  plate  in*^ 
flat  position 

b)  Butt  welds  in  1-60  mm  mild  steel  plate  in 
vertical  position  (  vertical  upward  ) 

c)  Butt  welds  in  3-15  mm  thick  plates  in  flat 
position 


see  Fig.  6 


GAP 


-SAW  CUT 


NICK    BREAK 


SPECIMEN 


I  SAW  CUT  TO  rULL  DEPTH   OF 
I  REINFORCEMENT -V 


♦Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  of  run.  Specimen  to  be 
tested  by  nick  breaking. 

♦♦Gap  T/2  for  fiat  position,  and  T  for  vertical   position,   where  T  is  the  thick- 
ness of  specimen. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  6    Butt  Weld  Specimen 


15 


IS:  1393-  1961 

14.2.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  B  —  The  trainee 
shall  be  required  to  make  three  check  test  specimens  conforming  to  the 
requirements  stated  in  Table  T 


TABLE 

;  I     SPECIMEN   WELDS   FOR  CHECK  TESTS 

ON   EXERCISES   IN 

SECTION  I  — 

GROUP  B 

Speci- 

Description 

Welding 

Joint 

Procedure  for 

men 

OF  Joint 

Position 

Preparation 

Welding 

No- 

and  Other 
Details 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

1 

Butt   weld   in    1-60 
mm      mild      steel 

Weld  to  be  made  in 
a    single    run     with 

sheet 

Flat 

Fig.  6 

1*60  mm  diameter 
filler  rod 

2 

Vertical 

Fig.  6 

Weld  to  be  made 
in  a  single  run  with 
1*60  mrri  diameter 
filler  rod  {  upward 
method  ) 

3 

Butt   weld   in   315 
mm      mild      steel 

W^eld  to  be  m^ade  in  a 
single  run  with  3-15 

sheet 

Flat 

Fig.  6 

mm  diameter  filler 
rod 

Note —  Forward  welding  technique  is  to  be  employed  and  no  back  sealing  run 
is  to  be  permitted. 


14.2.3  Each  weld  shall  be  inspected,  visually  for  surface  appearance 
and  condition,  penetration,  size  and  contour  checked  with  a  suitable  weld 
gauge,  and  then  ruptured  for  internal  examination.  Each  weld  shall  be 
assessed  on  the  basis  of  provisions  given  under  16. 

14.3  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  G 

14.3.1  The  exercises  in  Group  C  shall  be  designed  to  instruct  the 
trainee  in  the  technique  of  making  butt  welds  in  3*15  m.m.  m.ild  steel  plates 
in  vertical  position,  corner  welds  in  1-60  mm  mild  steel  plates  in  flat  and 
vertical  positions  and  fillet  welds  in  1-60  mm  mild  steel  plates  in  hori- 
zontal-vertical position.  Exercises  on  the  following  types  of  welds  shall 
be  included  in  this  group: 


Weld 

a)  Butt  welds  in  3T5  mm  mild  steel  sheet  in 
vertical  position 

b)  Corner  welds  in  1*60  mm  mild  steel  sheet  in 
flat  position 


Edge  Preparation 
Fig.  6 
Fig.  7 


16 


IS:  1393-  1961 


Wbld 

c)  Corner  wdds  in  1-60  mm  mild  steel  sheet  in 
vertical  position 

d)  Fillet  weld  in  1*60  mm  mild  steel  sheet  in 
horizontal-\'ertical  position 


150 


DISCARD 


ETCH  TEST 


DISCARD 


Edge  Preparation 
Fig.  7 
Fig.  8 


SPECIMEN 


50 


NO  GAP 


-1-60 


1-60- 


*VWM  to  be  st(i]>pcd  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  of  rnn.     Specimen  to  be 
cut  and  etched. 

All  {hniensions  in   millimetres. 
KiG.  7     Corner  Weld  Spfximen 


17 


IS  :  1393  -  1961 


ISO 


D    I     S 


ETCH   TEST 


D    I     S 


CARD 


SPECIMEN 


"1 


50* 


CARD 


lOO 


♦Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  aim  of  run.     Specimen  to  be 

cut  and  etched. 

All  dimensions  in   millimetres. 

Fig.  8     Fillet  Weld  Specimen;  JIoRizOiNTAL-VERTicAL  IJosition 


/« 


IS:  1393-  1961 

14.3.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  C  —  The  trainee 
shall  be  required  to  make  three  specimen  welds  conforming  to  the  require- 
ments stated  in  Table  II. 


TABLE 

U     SPECIMEN   WELDS   FOR  < 

CHECK  TEST 

ON   EXERCISES   IN 

SECTION  I  — 

GROUP  G 

Speci- 

Description 

Weeding 

Joint 

Procedure  for 

men 

OF    JOINT 

Position 

PREPAKATION 

Welding 

No. 

AND  Other 
Details 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

4 

Butt  weld  in   3-15 
mm      mild      steel 

\\  eld  to  be  made  in  a 
single  run  with  2-50 

sheet 

Vertical 

Fig.  6 

nun  or  1-60  mm  dia- 
meter filler  rod  (  up- 
ward mctliod  ) 

5 

Corner  weld  in  1-60 
mm      mild      steel 

Weld  to  be  made  in  a 
single  run   with  1*60 

sheet 

Flat 

Fig.  7 

mm  diameter  hller 
rod 

6 

Corner  weld  in  1-60 
mm      mild      steel 

Weld  to  be  made  in  a 
single  run  with  1-60 

sheet 

Vertical 

Fig.  7 

mm  diameter  liiier 
rod  (  upward  me- 
thod ) 

7 

Fillet  weld  in   i-60 

Weld  to  be  made  in  a 

mm      mild      steel 

Horizontal- 

single  run  with  1-60 

sheet 

vertical 

Fig.  8 

mm    diameter    hller 

rod 

Note  —  Forward  welding  technique  is  to  be  employed  and  in  the  case  of  butt  and 
corner  welds  no  back  sealing  run  shall  be  permitted. 


14.3.3  Each  weld  shall  be  inspected  visually  for  surface  appearance  and 
condition,  penetration,  size  and  contour  checked  with  a  suitable  gauge 
and  then  ruptured  for  internal  examination.  Each  weld  sliall  be  assessed 
on  the  basis  of  provisions  given  under  16. 

14*4  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  D 

14,4,1  The  exercises  in  Group  D  shall  be  designed  to  instruct  the  trainee 
in  the  technique  of  making  welds  in  thin-walled  mild  steel  tubes  —  butt 
welds,  branch  joints  and  tube-to-piate  joints  in  downhand  position. 
Exercises  on  the  following  types  of  welds  shall  be  included  in  this  group. 

Wkld 
a)  Butt    weld    in    25    mm    outside    diameter. 


Edgf.  Phkparation 


1-60  mm  wall  thickness  tubes  in  flat  ]X)si- 
tion,  turning  through   180'' 


Fig.  9 


V) 


IS:  1393-  1961 

Weld 

b)  Welds  of  branch  joints  in  25  mm  outside 
diameter  tube,  1*60  mm  wall  thickness, 
angles  90°  and  45°  in  flat  position  — 
turning  the  assembly  through  180° 

c)  Welds  in  sheet  to  tube  ( fillet )  —  sheet 
1-60  mm,  tube  25  mm  outside  diameter,  wall 
thickness  1*60  mm,  angles  90°  and  45°  in 
horizontal-vertical  position 


-T=1'60mm     — 


Edge  Preparation 


Fig.  10 


Fiu.   9     Butt  Wkld  of  Xubk   Ends 
25mm  4>  \ 


Fig.  11 


lOA  90^  Angle  lOii  45^  Angle 

Fig.    10     Hranch    Joints    in    Tubes 

14.4.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  I  —  Group  D  —  The  trainees 
shall  be  required  to  make  two  test  specimen  welds  conforming  to  the 
requirements  stated  in  Table  III. 


20 


IS:  1393-  1961 


—25  mm  ^  — ■* 


T  ^ 

All  90°  Angle  IIB  45°  Angle 

Fig.  11     Tube-to-Sheet  Joints 


TABLE  III 


Speci- 
men 
No. 

(1) 
8 


SPECIMEN  WELDS  FOR  CHECK  TEST  ON   EXERCISES  IN 
SECTION  I  — GROUP  D 


Description 
OF  Joint 


(2) 

Tube  —  25  mm 
outside  diameter, 
1-60  mm  wall 
thickness  to  sheet 
1'60  mm  thick  — 
angle  90° 

Tube  to  Tube  -^ 
Branch  Joints 


(  Clause  14.4.2  ) 


Welding 
Position 


(3) 


Horizontal- 
vertical 

Flat       and 
horizon- 
tal-vertical 


Joint 

Preparation 

and  Other 

Details 

(4) 


Fig.  12 
Fig.  13 


Note  —  Forward  welding  technique  is  to  be  employed. 


Procedure  for 
Welding 


(5) 

Weld  as  specified  in 
Fig.  12  to  be  made 
with  1-60  mm  dia- 
meter filler  rod  in 
one  pass 

Welds  as  specified  in 
Fig.  13  to  be  made 
with  1*60  mm  dia- 
meter filler  rods  in 
one  pass.  The  as- 
sembly may  be 
turned  through  180°' 


14.4.3  Each  weld  shall  be  inspected  visually  for  surface  appearance 
and  condition,  size  and  contour  checked  with  a  suitable  gauge,  and  then 
sectioned  for  internal  examination.  Each  weld  shall  be  assessed  on  the 
basis  of  provisions  given  under  16. 

15.  EXERCISES  —  SECTION  II  WELDING  OF  CAST  IRON, 
ALUMINIUM,  BRASS  AND  MANUAL  OXYGEN 
CUTTING  AND  FLAME  GOUGING 

15.0  Exercises  in  this  section  are  extensions  of  those  in  Section  I,  cover- 
ing   welding    of    aluminium,    brass    and    cast    iron    ( fusion    and    braze 


21 


IS:  1393-  1961 


-TEE  TO  BE  CUT  INTO  FOUR  PIECES 
BY  SAWING  AND  SECTIONS  TO  BE 
POLISHED  AND  ETCHED 


'All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.   12    Weld   Specimen   of  Tube-to-Sheet   Joint 

welding)  and  manual  oxygen  cutting  and  flame  gouging.  This  section 
is  intended  for  the  trainee  who  is  able  to  complete  successfully  the 
course  of  training  scheduled  in  Section  I. 

15.1  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  E 

15.1.1  The  exercises  in  Group  E  shall  be  designed  to  instruct  the  trainee 
in  the  techniques  of  making  butt  welds  in  pure  aluminium  and  brass  sheets 


22 


IS:  1393-  1961 


TO  BE  SAW    CUT    INTO 

4    PIECES    AND    SECTIONS 

TO    BE   POLISHED   AND    ETCHED 


75 


I 


4MIN 
5  MAX 


^ ^ 


-• 4-/»  MiN 

5  MAX 

DETAILS  OF  WELD 


-WELD  SIZE  TO   BE  MEASURED 
AT   THE    CROTCHES 


75- 


AU  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  13     Weld  Specimen  of  Tube-to-Tubk  Rranch  Joint 

up  to  a  thickness  of  345  mm.     The  following  types  of  welds  shall  be  in- 
cluded in  this  group: 


Weld 

a)  Butt  welds  in   1*60  mm  thick  pure  alumi- 
nium sheets  in  flat  position 

b)  Butt  welds  in  3-15  mm  thick  pure  alumi- 
nium sheets  in  flat  position 

c)  Butt  welds  in  1-60  mm  thick  brass  sheets  in 
flat  position 


Edge  Preparation 
Fig.  6 
Fig.  14 
Fig.  6 


23 


IS:  1393-  1961 

Weld  Edge  Preparation 

d)  Butt  welds  in  3-15  mm  thick  brass  sheets  in 

flat  position  Fig.  14 

Note  —  Flame  conditions : 

For  aluminium  —  neutral  with  a  slight  liaze  of  excess  acetylene,  and 
For  brass- — oxidizing. 


ISO 


NICK     BREAK 


lOO 


TEST     SPECIMEN 


lOO 


so* 


14A 


80  TO  90. 


ROOT  FACE  1-5 


i      _4  U_  ROOT  GAP  ;-0  WIN 

V5  MAX 


14B 


♦Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  run.     Specimen  to  be 
cut  and  nick  broken. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  14     Butt  Weld  Specimen  in  Aluminium  or  Brass  Sheet 


24 


IS: 1393  -  1961 

15.1.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  E  —  The  trainee 
shall  be  required  to  make  two  test  specimen  welds  conforming  to  the 
reqjuLirements  in  Table  IV, 


TABLE 

IV     SPECIMEN  WELDS  FOR 

CHECK  TEST 

ON   EXERCISES  IN 

SECTION  II  — 

-GROUP  E 

Speci- 

Description 

Welding 

Joint 

Procedure  for 

men 

OF  Joint 

Position 

Preparation 

Welding 

No. 

AND  Other 
Details 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

10 

Butt   weld   hi   3-15 
mm     thick     pure 

Weld  to  be  made  in 
a    single    run     with 

aluminium  sheet 

Flat 

Fig.   14 

3-15     mm    diameter 

liller  rod 

11 

Butt   weld   in   3*15 
mm     thick     brass 

Weld  to  be  made 
in  a  single  run  with 

sheet 

Flat 

Fig.    14 

3-15    mm    diameter 

iiller  rod 

NOTH 

;  —  Forward   welding 

technique  is 

to 

be    employed 

and    no    back    sealing 

run  is  to 

be  permitted. 

15.1.3  Each  weld  shall  be  inspected  visually  for  surface  appearance 
and  condition,  penetration,  size  and  contour  checked  with  a  suitable  gauge, 
and  then  ruptured  for  internal  examination.  Each  weld  shall  be  assessed 
on  the  basis  of  provisions  given  under  16. 

15.2  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  F 

15.2.1  Exercises  in  this  group  shall  be  designed  to  instruct  the  trainee 
in  the  technique  of  making  butt  welds  in  cast  iron  by  the  fusion  and  braze 
welding  technique  in  flat  position.  The  following  types  of  welds  shall 
be  included  in  this  group: 

Weld 

a)  Butt  welds  in  cast  iron  plates  10  mm 
and  12  mm  thick  in  flat  position  by  the 
fusion  technique 

b)  Butt  welds  in  cast  iron  plates  10  mm  and 
12  mm  thick  in  flat  position  by  the  braze 
welding  technique 

Note  —  Flame  conditions: 

For  fusion  welding  —  strictly  neutral,  and 
For  braze    welding   --  sUghtly  oxidizing. 

15.2.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  F  —  The  trainee 
shall  be  required  to  make  two  test  specimen  weJds  conforming  to  the 
requirements  stated  in  Table  V. 


Edge  Preparation 


Fig.  15(A) 

Fig.  15(A)  or 
Fig.  15(B) 


25 


IS:  1393-  1961 


80°  TO  90° 


<  > 


T 

T 
± 


!00T  FACE  1-5    ^      -J  U-ROOT  GAP  \'l\^^^^ 

1*5  MAX 

15  A 


80  TO  90* 


ROOT  FACE 


1-5  J  — A  k—  ROOT  gap!*P.^!^ 


1-5  MAX 


15B 


KoTE  —  AH  corners  rounded. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  15     Butt  Weld  in  Cast  Iron  Plate 


TABLE  V     SPECIMEN   WELDS   FOR   CHECK   TEST   ON   EXERCISES   IN 
SECTION  II  — GROUP  F 

(Clause  15.2.2) 


Speci-               Dksckiption 

\^ 

^'ELDING 

JOEVT 

Fkocedure  for 

MEN                             OF    JOrNT 

I 

OSITION 

PRliPAK.VTlON 

Welding 

No. 

AND  Other 
Details 

(1)                           (2) 

(3j 

(4) 

(5) 

12             Butt    weld   111    cast 

iron  plate  12  mm 

y^^-     15(A) 

Weld     to     be    made 

thick  V>v  the  fusion 

and      Fig. 

with     6     mm     dia- 

tecl)ni<iue 

Flat 

16 

meter  filler  rod 

13             Butt    weld    in    cast 

i^ig-     15(A) 

Weld     to     be     made 

iron  ])]ate  10  mm 

or         Fig. 

witli     5     mm     dia- 

thick h\  the  braze 

15(B)   and 

meter  hlfer  rod 

welding  technique 

Idat 

Fig.   16 

Note —  Forward    welding 

tech 

nique    is 

to    h<i  used  and 

no  back  sealing  run  is 

to   be  permitted. 

26 


13:1393-1961 


^80°TO90V 


R00TFACE,.5i_||_3^p    ,. 


0  MtN 
1'5  MAX 


-50 


DISCARD 


N(CK  BREAK 


DISCARD 


TE 


50 


ST 


SPECIMEN 


50 


150 


50 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.    16     Butt    \Veij>   Specimen   in  Cast   Iron  Plate 


15.2.3  Each  weld  shall  be  irfspected  visually  for  surface  appearance  and 


condition,  penetration, 


and  then  ruptured  for  internal  examination, 
on  the  basis  of  provisions  given  under  16. 


and  contour  checked  with  a  suitable  gauge. 


Each  weld  sliall  be  assessed 


15*3  Exercises  in  Section  li  —  Croixp  G 

15.3.1  Exercises  in  this  group  slsall  he  designed  to  instruct  the  tr;unee 
in  the  technique  of  making  butt  wrlds  in  cast  iron  hv  the  brn^e  welding 
technique  in  vertical  posiiion  and  depositing  hardfacing  rods  o^  rndd  sLeel 


IS:1393-  1961 

^  flat  position, 
group: 


The  following  types  of  welds  shall  be  included  in  this 


Edge  Preparation 

Fig.  15(A)  or 
Fig.  15(B) 


Weld 

a)'  Butt  welds  in  cast  iron  plates  10  mm  and 
12  mm  thick  in  vertical  position  by  braze 
welding  technique 

b)  Depositing  hardfacing  rods  on  10  mm 
thick  plates  in  flat  position  (plate  prepa- 
ration, flame  condition,  etc,  according  to 
the  directions  of  the  makers  of  the  rod)  — 

15.3.2  Check  Tests  on  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  G  —  The  trainee 
shall  be  required  to  make  one  test  specimen  weld  conforming  to  the  require- 
ments stated  in  Table  VI. 


TABLE  VI 


Speci- 
men 

No. 


SPECIMEN  WELD   FOR  CHECK  TEST   ON   EXERCISES   IN 
SECTION  II  —  GROUP  G 


Description 
OF  Joint 


(1)  (2) 

14  Butt  weld  in  cast 

iron  plate  10  mm 
thick  by  the  braze 
welding  technique 


Welding 
Position 


(3) 


Vertical 


Joint 

Preparation 

and  Other 

Details 

(4) 


Fig.  15(A), 
or  Fig. 
15(B)  and 

Fig.  16 


Procedure  for 
Welding 


(5) 


Weld  to  be  made 
with  5  mm  rod 
(  upward    method  ) 


Note  —  No  specific  test  is  prescribed  for  testing  the  trainee  on  hardfacing. 


15.3.3  The  weld  shall  be  inspected  visually  for  surface  appearance  and 
condition,  penetration,  size  and  contour  checked  with  a  suitable  gauge, 
and  then  ruptured  for  internal  examination.  Each  weld  shall  be  assessed 
on  the  basis  of  provisions  given  under  16. 

15.4  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  H 

15.4.1  Exercises  in  this  group  shall  be.  designed  to  instruct  the  trainee 
in  manual  oxygen  cutting  and  flame  gouging.  The  following  exercises 
shall  be  included  in  this  group : 

a)  The  trainee  shall  receive  training  in  the  handling  and  operation 
of  h^nd-cutting  blow  pipe,  in  cutting  plates  and  sections  and  in 
piercing  holes  in  plates;  and 


28 


18:1393-1961 

b)  The  trainee  shall  receive  training  in  the  handling  and  operation 
of  flame-gouging  blow  pipe,  in  making  grooves  on  plates,  in  the  removal 
of  welds  and  in  rivet  cutting. 

15.4.2  Check  Test  on  Exercises  in  Section  II  —  Group  H  —  The  trainee 
shall  be  required  to  make  two  test  specimens  conforming  to  the  require- 
ments stated  in  Table  VII. 


TABLE  VII     SPECIMEN  FOR  CHECK  TEST  ON  EXERCISES  IN 
SECTION  II  —  GROUP  H 

Specimen  Description  of  Work 

No. 

15  A  75-Tnm  square  to  be  cut  in  the  centre  of  a  plate  of  size  150  mm 

X  150  mm  and  12  mm  thick 

16  A  fillet  Aveld  to  be  removed  from  a  tee  joint 


15.4.3  The  test  specimens  are  to  be  assessed  as  under: 

a)  Manual  Cutting  —  The  abihty  of  the  trainee  to  start  the  cut  by 
piercing  a  hole  and  to  make  a  reasonably  clean  cut  following  the 
profile  as  nearly  as  possible  bearing  in  mind  the  limitations  of 
manual  oxygen  cutting. 

b)  Flame  Gouging  —  The  ability  of  the  trainee  to  remove  the  weld 
without  damaging  the  plates. 

15.4.4  If  the  trainee  successfully  performs  these  two  check  tests 
{see  15.4,2),  he  should  be  deemed  to  have  qualified  for  manual  oxygen 
cutting  and  flame  gouging,  initial  qualification  tests. 

16.  ASSESSMENT  OF  CHECK  TEST  WELDS  IN 
SECTIONS  I  AND  II 

16.0  In    the    assessment    of    the    check    test    welds,    the    factors    given 
under  16.1  and  16.2  shall  receive  consideration. 

16.1  Inspection  Before  Fracture 

16.1.1  Factor  1  —  Dimensions  of  Weld  Deposit  —  The  dimensions  of  the 
weld  shall  be  checked.  The  size  of  the  weld  shall  be  as  specified  and  it 
may  be  slightly  over  but  not  under. 

16.1.2  Factor  2  —  Shape  of  Profile  —  The  profile  of  the  weld  is  affected 
by  the  position  of  the  joint,  but  it  shall  be  uniform.  In  the  case  of  butt 
and  comer  welds,  the  profile  shall  be  slightly  convex  and  in  the  case  of 
fillet  weld,  it  is  usually  slightly  concave. 

29 


IS  :  1393  -  1961 

16.1.3  Factor  3  —  Uniformity  of  Surface  —  The  height  and  spacing  of 
the  ripples  shall  be  uniform,  these  being  indicative  of  the  quality  of  work- 
manship. 

16*1.4  Factor  4  —  Degree  of  Undercut  —  Undercutting  is  undesirable. 
The  weld  joint  shall  be  free  from  undercut  but  slight  intermittent  occur- 
rences may  be  disregarded. 

16.1.5  Factor  5  — Smoothness  of  Joints  Where  Welding  is  Recommended  — 
The  joints  in  the  weld  run,  where  welding  has  been  recommended,  shall 
be  as  smooth  as  possible  and  shall  show  no  pronounced  hump  or  crater 
in  the  weld  surface. 

16.1.6  Factor  6 — Freedom  from  Surface  Defects  —  The  surface  of  the 
weld  shall  be  free  from  porosity,  cavities  and  burnt-on  scale. 

16.1.7  Factor  7 — Penetration  Bead  in  Butt  Welds  —  A  slight  penetra- 
tion bead  shall  be  present  and  it  should  be  reasonably  uniform  in  width 
and  appearance.  Occasional  occurrences  of  lack  of  penetration  bead  may 
be  disregarded. 

16.2  Inspection  of  Etched  Sections  and  Weld  Fractures  —  Inspection  of 
etched  sections  and  weld  fractures  gives  information  concerning  degree 
of  fusion,  degree  of  root  penetration,  gas  cavities  and  quality  of  weld 
metal. 

16.2.1  Factor  8  —  Degree  of  Fusion  —  Fusion  shall  be  complete  over 
the  whole  area  of  the  joint  surface. 

16.2.2  Factor  9  —  Degree  of  Root  Penetration,  Butt  and  Fillet  Welds  — 
Defects  are  most  likely  to  occur  at  the  root  of  the  weld  and,  in  this  posi- 
tion, they  are  hable  to  have  the  maximum  effect  in  reducing  the  strength 
of  the  weld.  A  close  examination  of  the  root  shall,  therefore,  be  made. 
In  butt  welds,  the  penetration  should  extend  to  the  underside  of  the  plates 
producing  a  penetration  bead  of  the  right  size.  In  fillet  welds  with  good 
rapt  penetration  the  weld  metal  should  reach  the  corner. 

Note  1  —  In  tube  to  tube  branch  joints,  both  butt  and  fillet  welds  will  appear 
in  a  joint,  fillets  being  at  the  crotches. 

Note  2  — -In  case  of  welding  of  cast  iron  by  the  braze  welding  technique, 
the  joint  shall  show  satisfactory  penetration  and  adhesion. 

16.2.3  Factor  10  —  Gas  Cavities  and  Inclusions  —  Unless  they  are  caused 
by  the  use  of  unsuitable  material,  they  are  attributable  to  the  quality  of 
workmanship,  the  desired  result  being  to  achieve  uniform  appearance  and 
freedom  from  cavities  and  flux  entrapments  (where  flux  is  used).  In 
fusion  welding  of  mild  steel,  cast  iron  and  aluminium  where  neutral  flame 
is  used,  and  in  fusion  welding  of  brass  or  braze  welding  of  cast  iron  where 
oxidizing  flame  is  used,  incorrect  welding  technique  may  result  in  rough 
porous,  discoloured  and  lustreless  appearance  in  the  fracture. 

Note  —  In  case  of  fusion  welding  or  braze  welding  of  cast  iron,  isolated  blow- 
holes or  concentration  of  pinholes  in  the  weld  metal  shall  be  regarded  as  grounds 
for  rejection  but  isolated  pinholes  shall  not  be  so  regarded. 

30 


IS:  1393-  1961 


17.  INSTRUCTION  IN  WELDING  THEORY 


17.1  General  —  Each  trainee  shall  receive  training  in  subjects  related  to 
the  theory  of  welding  for  at  least  50  hours,  that  is  25  hours  each  for  Sec- 
tions I  and  II  (see  6.2),  The  instructor  shall  be  responsible  for  seeing 
that  each  trainee  acquires  a  satisfactory  knowledge  of  the  subjects  covered 
in  the  course.  The  instruction,  w^hen  possible,  shall  be  supplemented  by 
films  or  other  visual  aids. 

17.2  Safety  in  Welding  —  The  instruction  course  shall  be  so  designed 
as  to  make  the  trainee  aware  of  the  necessity  for  observing  the  safety 
precautions  under  the  following  three  general  headings: 

a)  Protection  of  Person,  thut  is,  proper  footwear,  clothing,  goggles  with 
proper  shade  of  lens,  adequate  ventilation,  etc. 

b)  Protection  of  Property,  that  is,  safeguarding  combustible  material, 
protection  from  flying  sparks  and  flame,  availability  of  fire  protec- 
tion equipment,  etc. 

c)  Protection  and  Care  of  Equipment,  that  is,  storage  and  handling 
of  oxygen  and  acetylene  cylinders,  carbide  and  acetylene  gene- 
rator (where  low  pressure  system  is  used),  operation  of  pressure 
regulators,  handling  of  blow  pipe,  care  o":  hose  and  hose  connec- 
tions, welding  tips,  etc. 

17.2.1  The  instruction  in  safety  shall  be  given  before  the  trainee  is 
permitted  to  use  any  welding  equipmxent.  A  list  of  recom.m.ended  rules 
of  safety  is  given  in  Appendix  G  and  should  be  used  in  this  instruction. 

17.2.2  For  detailed  instructions  for  safety  and  health  requirements  in 
welding  and  cutting  operations,  reference  should  be  made  to  IS:  818-1957 
Code  of  Practice  for  Safety  and  Health  Reqliirements  in  Electric  and  Gas 
Welding  and  Cutting  Operations. 

17.3  Welding  Equipment  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  be  designed 
to  instruct  the  trainee  in  the  principles  of  blow  pipe  and  regulator  design 
and  functional  aspects,  in  fitting  and  dismantling  equipment  (  not  stripping 
down  into  various  components ),  flame  adjustment,  care  of  equipment,  etc. 

17.4  Welding  Techniques  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  be  designed 
to  instruct  the  trainee  in  the  various  welding  techniques  —  forward,  right- 
ward  or  backward,  all-position  rightward,  vertical  and  double  operator 
vertical,  flames  to  be  used  for  welding  various  metals  and  alloys,  selection 
of  correct  size  of  tips  to  be  used,  edge  preparation,  etc, 

17.5  Welding  Terms  and  Symbols  —  Instructions  in  these  subjects 
shall  be  designed  to  acquaint  the  trainee  with  the  more  important  terms 
relating  to  oxy-acetylene  welding  and  the  standard  symbols  used  for  detail- 
ing welds  and  weld  sizes  on  drawings.  The  instructions  in  welding  terms 
and  symbols  should  be  based  on  IS:  812-1957  and  IS:  813-1956  respectively. 

31 


IS:  1393"  1961 

17.6  Welding  Metallurgy  —  Steel  Only  (With  Special  Reference 
to  Sheet  Metal  Welding  )  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  be  designed 
to  give  the  trainee  an  elementary  knowledge  of  the  metallurgical  and  ther- 
mal factors  in  the  welding  of  steel,  with  particular  reference  to  welding 
of  sheet  metal. 

17.7  Welding  Metallurgy — Cast  Iron,  Aluminiutn,  Brass  and 
Bronze  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  be  designed  to  give  the  trainee 
an  elementary  knowledge  of  the  metalhugical  and  thermal  factors  in  the 
welding  of  these  metals,  tlicir  special  welding  techniques,  limitations,  post- 
weld  treatment,  flux  residue  removal  treatment,  etc. 

17.8  Welding  of  Castings  —  Instructions  iu  this  subject  shall  be 
designed  to  give  the  trainee  a  knowledge  on  the  teclmiques  of  welding 
castings  —  ferrous  and  non-ferrous  metals,  the  object  and  necessity  for 
pre-  and  post-heating,  methods  of  preparation  of  fracture,  etc. 

17.9  Hardfacing  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  be  designed  to  give 
the  trainee  an  elementary  knowledge  of  different  types  of  hardfacing 
rods  and  their  appHcations,  preparation  for  hardfacing,  etc. 

17.10  Oxygen  Cutting  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  be  designed 
to  give  the  trainee  an  elementary  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  oxygen 
cutting,  effects  of  different  elements  in  steel  on  cutting,  precautions  to  be 
taken  in  cutting  alloy  steels,  etc. 

17.11  Inspection  and  Testing  of  Welds  —  Instructions  in  this  subject 
shall  be  designed  to  acquaint  the  trainee  with  the  more  common  methods 
of  weld  inspection  and  testing,  as  applied  to  welds  made  both  in  the  shop 
and  in  the  field,  and  may  be  given  in  the  form  of  a  discussion  of  the  trainee's 
welds  before  and  after  testing.  The  instructor  shall  point  out  such  factors 
as  may  have  caused  defects  in  the  specimen.  In  the  overall  study  of 
this  subject,  destructive  and  non-destructive  methods  of  testing  shall  be 
covered. 

17.11.1  For     inspection     of     welds,     reference    should    be    made    to 
*IS :  822-       Code  of  Practice  for  Inspection  of  Welds. 

17.12  Characteristics  of  Filler  Rods  —  Instructions  in  this  subject 
shall  be  designed  to  familiarize  the  trainee  with  the  different  types  of 
filler  rods  used  in  oxy-acetylene  welding. 

17.13  Costing  —  Instructions  in  this  subject  shall  include  a  study  of 
elements  of  estimating  material  requirements  and  factors  affecting  weld- 
ing cost. 

17.14  Possibilities  and  Limitations  of  Welding —  The  trainee  shall, 
through  discussions  and  denopnstrations,  be  given  an  appreciation  of  the 
limitations  and  possibilities  of  oxy-acetyiene  welding. 

♦Under  preparation. 

32 


IS:  1393  -  19ei 

PART  \y     TESTS  FOR  W^ELDERS 

18,  GENERAL 

18.1  These  tests  shall  be  of  the  following  three  types: 
a)  Initial  quaHfication  test, 

\)  Annual  test,  and 
c)  Periodic  control  test. 

18.2  These  tests  are  designed  to  show  that  the  welder  is  familiar  with 
the  usual  welding  techniques.  Approval  of  welders  for  works  of  special 
nature  may  demand  additional  special  trade  or  approval  tests. 

18.3  Annual  tests  and  periodic  control  tests  are  to  be  done  by  the  employers, 
as  required. 

19.  INITIAL  QUALIFICATION  TESTS 

19.0  General  —  The  initial  qualification  tests  shall  be  conducted  after 
the  trainee  has  completed  all  the  requirements  prescribed  in  Part  III  of 
this  code.  The  initial  qualification  tests  would  comprise  of  eight  tests. 
The  details  of  test  pieces  and  test  procedures  for  these  tests  shall  be  as  given 
under  19.1  to  19.8. 

19.1  Test  No.  1  —  Oxy- Acetylene  Butt  Welds  in  Mild  Steel 
Plate  315  mm  Thick 

19.1.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in   the 
code. 

19.1.2  Position  —  The  test  welds  shall  be  deposited  in  the  appropriate 
position  as  follows: 

Flat  (  slope  0^  rotation  0° ) 

Vertical  (  slope  90^  ) 

19.1.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the  require- 
ments of  Fig.  17.     The  joints  shall  be  prepared  as  below: 

Edges  Square  or  single  V  ( included  angle  80°  and  no  root  face  ) 

Gap  Not  less  than  half  the  plate  thickness  but  not  more  than 

the  plate  thickness 

The  plate  edges  may  be  prrpar'^d  by  shearing,  machining,  grinding 
or  filing.  Tack  welds  shail  ue  on  the  side  to  be  welded  and  in  line  of  the 
weld.  No  other  method  of  restraint  shall  be  used.  Distortion  or  misalign- 
ment caused  by  tacking  may  be  corrected  before  the  test  weld  is  deposited. 
The  test  piece  shall  be  supported  in  such  a  manner  that  contact  with  the 
bench  or  other  material  does  not  provide  a  backing  for  joint. 

33 


18:1393-1961 


— H  I— GAP  .  ^  MJN,  T 

=11  I 


MAX 


NO  ROOT  FACE 


J 


4  [—  GAP  «  I  MtN,  T  MAX 


100 


DISCARD 


FACE    BEND 


DISCARD 


NICK    BREAK 


DISCARD 


ROOT    BEND 


DISCARD 


100 


SPECIMEN 


SPECIMEN 


SPECIMEN 


-SAW  CUT 


NICK    BREAK 


SPECIMEN 


SAW  CUT  TO  FULL  DEPTH    OF 


ibAW   (JUT    TO   FU 
^REINFORCEMENT 


50 


225 
~T  TEST 

WWELD 


_L 


50 


r 


h 


t 


300 


♦Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  of  run. 
All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig,  17     Oxy-Acetylene  Butt  Welds  in  Mild  Steel  Plate  3-15  mm  Thick 


34 


IS:  1393-  1961 

19.L4  Filler  Rod  —  The  filler  rod  used  shall  be  3-15  mm  in  diameter, 
but  for  welding  in  vertical  position  lesser  diameter  rod  but  not  less  than 
1-60  mm  in  diameter  may  be  used.  The  type  of  filler  rod  as  stipulated  in 
the  code  shall  be  used. 

19.1.5  Depositing  the  Test  Weld  — The  test  weld  shall  be  225  mm 
long  as  shown  in  Fig.  17.  The  weld  shall  be  deposited  in  a  single  run 
using  the  appropriate  method  as  follows: 

Position  Method 

Flat  Forward 

Vertical  Forward  (  Vertical  upward ) 

The  weld  shall  be  stopped  and  started  within  the  central  SO  mm  of 
the  run.  A  seaUng  run  on  the  reverse  side  is  not  permitted,  so  that  the 
degree  of  root  penetration  can  be  subsequently  examined. 

19.1.6  Assessment 

19.1.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 
for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  uniformity  of  surface,  degree 
of  undercut,  smoothness  of  joints,  freedom  from  surface  defects,  pene- 
tration, etc,  as  under  16.1. 

19.1*6.2  Destructive  tests  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  cut  out  by 
machining  or  sawing  as  indicated  in  Fig.  17  and  tested  as  under: 

a)  Etch  test  —  One  of  the  cut  surfaces  of  the  test  specimen  shall  be 
prepared  and  etched  and  then  visually  examined  as  under  16.1 
and  16.2  ( for  etch  test  method  see  Appendix  H ). 

b)  Bend  test  —  The  top  and  underside  of  the  two  bend  test  specimens 
shall  be  dressed  flush.  When  bent  through  180°  over  a  former 
thrice  the  thickness  of  the  sheet  that  is  10  mm,  each  specimen 
shall  show  no  crack  or  defect  attributable  to  defective  workman- 
ship, i  Slight  cracking  at  the  ends  of  the  weld  metal  occurring  dur- 
ing bending  may  be  disregarded.  One  specimen  shall  be  tested 
with  the  face  and  the  other  with  the  root  in  tension. 

c)  Nick  break  test  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  notched  as  indicated 
in  Fig.  17,  broken  open  along  the  weld  and  the  fractured  surface 
visually  examined  as  under  16.2. 

19.2    Test  No.   2   Oxy-Acetylene   Tee   Fillet   Weld   in   Mild    Steel 
Sheet  1*60  mm  Thick 

19.2.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  code. 

19.2.2  Position  —  The  test  welds  shall  be  deposited  in  the  appropriate 
position  as  follows: 

Horizontal-vertical  (slope  0°,  rotation  45°) 

Vertical  ( slope  90°  ) 

35 


18:1393-1961 

19.2.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the  re- 
quirements of  Fig.  18.  '  Tack  welds  shall  be  on  the  side  to  be  welded  and 
in  line  of  the  weld.  No  other  method  of  restraint  shall  be  used.  Dis- 
tortion or  misalignment  caused  by  tacking  may  be  corrected  before  the 
test  weld  is  deposited. 


DISC 

ARD 

. 

i 

NICK 
TEST  SP 

BREAK 
ECIMEN 

t. 

DISC 

ARD 

^ 

—  V60 

' 

\ 

100 

WELD  THIS 

NO 
GAP-v 

SiDEz 

-* 10 

—  50  — 
0  •- 

-1 

<,o 


GROOVE  ALONG 
WELD    FORMED 
BY    SAWING, 
6  mm  DEER; 


1-60 


♦Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  of  run. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  18     Oxy-Acetylene  Tee  Fillet  Weld  in  Mild  Steel  Sheet  1-60  mm  Thick 


19.2.4  Filler  Rod  —  The  filler  rod  used  shall  be  1-60  mm  in  diameter 
and  of  the  type  stipulated  in  the  code. 

19.2.5  Deposition  of  the  Test  Weld  —  The  test  weld  shall  be  between 
4  mm  and  5  mm  in  size,  using  the  appropriate  method  as  follows: 

Position  Method 

Horizontal-vertical  Forward 

Vertical  Forward  (  Vertical  upward  ) 

The  weld  shall  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  the  central  50  mm  of 
the  test  piece. 


36 


18:1393-1961 


19,2,6  Assessment 


19.2.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 
for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  uniformity  of  surface,  degree 
of  undercut,  smoothness  of  joint,  freedom  from  surface  defects,  etc,  as 
under  16.1. 

19.2.6.2  Destructive  test  —  The  test  piece  shall  be  cut  out  by  machin- 
ing or  sawing  as  indicated  in  the  figure  and  tested  as  under: 

a)  Etch  test  —  One  of  the  cut  surfaces  of  the  test  specimen  shall 
be  prepared  and  etched  and  then  visually  examined  as  under  16.1 
and  16.2  for  etch  test  method,  ( see  Appendix  H  ). 

b)  Nick  break  test  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  notched  by  saw- 
cuts,  as  indicated  in  Fig.  18.  The  test  piece  shall  then  be  fractured 
by  bending  to  and  fro  until  fracture  occurs,  when  it  shall  be  exa- 
mined as  under  16,2. 

19.3  Test    No.    3    Oxy-Acetylene    Corner    Weld    in     Mild     Steel 
Sheet  1  60  mm  Thick 

19.3.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the 
code. 

19.3.2  Position  —  The  test  welds  shall  be  deposited  in  the  appropriate 
position  as  follows: 

Flat  (  slope  0^  rotation  0°  ) 

Vertical  (  slope  90°  ) 

19.3.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the  re- 
quirements of  Fig.  19.  Tack  welds,  if  used,  shall  be  on  the  side  to  be  weld- 
ed and  in  line  of  the  weld.  No  method  of  restraint  shall  be  used.  Dis- 
tortion or  misalignment  caused  by  tacking  may  be  corrected  before  the 
test  weld  is  deposited. 

19.3.4  Filler  Rod  — Th^  filler  rod  used  shall  be  1-60  mm  in  diameter 
and  of  the  type  stipulated  in  the  code. 

19.3.5  Deposition  of  Test  Weld  —  The  test  weld  shall  be  deposited  using 
the  appropriate  method  as  follows: 

Position  Method 

Flat  Forward 

Vertical  Forward 

( Vertical  upward ) 

The    weld    shall   be   stopped    and    restarted  within  the  central  50  mm 
of  the  test  piece. 

19.3.6  Assessment 

19.3.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 
for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  uniformity  of  surface,  degree 

37 


IS:1393-1%1 


150 


50 

L 


DISCARD 


DESTRUCTIVE 

TESTS  SPECIMEN 


DISCARD 


♦Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  of  run.     This  piece  to  be 
subjected  to   destructive  test. 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  19    Oxy-Acetylene  Corner  Weld  in  Mild  Steel  Sheet  1-60  mm  Thick 


of  undercut,  smoothness  of  joints,  freedom  from  surface  defects,  penetra- 
tion etc,  as  under  16.1.  • 

19.3.6*2  Destructive  tests  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  cut  out  by 
machining  or  sawing  as  indicated  in  Fig.  19  and  tested  as  under: 

Etch  test  —  One  of  the  cut  surfaces  of  the  test  specimen  shall  be 
prepared  and  etched  and  then  visually  examined  as  under  16.1 
and  16,2. 


IS:  1393-  1961 

19.4  Test  No.  4  Oxy- Acetylene  Fillet  Weld  Branch  Joints  in  Mild 
Steel  Tube,  Wall  Thickness  Up  to  1  -60  mm  and  Outside  Diameter 
Up  to  60  mm 

19.4*1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the 
code. 

19.4.2  Position  —  The  test  piece  may  be  moved  into  any  position  at 
the  option  of  the  trainee  or  the  welder. 

19.4.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  be  made  of  tubes 
shown  in  Fig.  20.  The  ends  of  the  tubes  at  the  joints  shall  be  prepared 
to  fit  closely  on  outside  diameter  of  the  main  tube.  The  tubes  shall  be 
lack  welded  together  or  held  in  a  suitable  jig. 


S€CTI0N    FOR  ETCHING  ^^Tmrn^MAX^""^^" 

DETAl  OF  WELD  SIZE 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres, 

iFlG.    20      OXY-ACETYLENE    FiLLET    WeLD     BRANCH     JOINTS    IN    MiLD    StEEL    TuBE, 

Wall  Thickness  Up  to  1-60  mm  and  Outside  Diameter  Up  to  60  mm 


19.4.4  Filler  Rod  —  The  filler  rod  used  shall  be  1'60  mm  in  diameter 
and  of  the  type  stipulated  in  the  code. 

19.4.5  Deposition  of  Test  Welds  —  The  test  welds  shall  be  between 
2*5  mm  and  4  mm  size  at  the  crotches  of  the  right  angle  joints  and  shall 
l>e  deposited  using  the  forward  method. 


39 


IS:  1393-  1961 

19.4,6  Assessment 

19.4.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 

for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  uniformity  of  surface,  degree 
of  undercut,  smoothness  of  joints,  freedom  from  surface  defects,  etc,  as 
under  16.1. 

19.4.6.2  Destructive  test  —  The  test  piece  shall  be  cut  out  by  machining' 
or  sawing  as  shown  in  Fig.  20  and  the  cut  faces  shall  be  prepared  and 
etched  and  then  visually  examined  as  under  16.1  and  16.2. 

19,5  Test  No.  6  Oxy-Acetylene  Butt  Welds  in  Pure  Aluminium 
Sheet  (  SI  A,  SIB  or  SIC  )  3  15  mm  Thick 

19.5.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the 
code. 

19.5.2  Position  —  The  test  welds  shall  be  deposited  in  the  flat  position 
(slope  0°,  rotation  0^). 

19.5.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the  re- 
quirements of  Fig.  21.  The  plate  edges  may  be  prepared  by  shearing, 
machining  or  filing.  The  tack  welds  shall  be  on  the  side  to  be  welded  in 
the  line  of  the  weld.  No  other  method  of  restraint  shall  be  used.  Dis* 
tortion  or  misalignment  caused  by  tacking  may  be  corrected  before  the 
test  weld  is  deposited.  The  test  piece  shall  be  supported  in  such  a  man- 
ner that  contact  with  the  bench  or  other  material  does  not  provide  as 
backing  for  the  joint. 

19.5.4  Filler  Red  —  The  filler  rod  used  shall  be  3-15  mm  in  diameter 
and  of  the  type  as  specified  in  the  code. 

Note  —  Suitable  flux  should  be  used. 

19.5.5  Deposition  of  Test  Weld  —  The  test  weld  shall  be  225  mm  long" 
as  shown  in  Fig.  21.  The  weld  shall  be  deposited  in  a  single  run  using  the 
forward  method  in  the  flat  position. 

The  weld  shall  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  the  central  50  mm  of 
the  run.  A  sealing  run  on  the  reverse  sidf*  is  not  permitted,  so  that  the 
degree  of  root  penetration  can  be  subsequently  examined. 

19.5.6  Assessment 

19.5.6.1  Visual  examination — ^  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined, 
for  dimension  of  a  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  uniformity  of  surface,  degree 
of  undercut,  smoothness  of  joints,  freedom  from  surface  defects,  pene* 
tration,  etc,  as  under  16.1. 

19.5.6.2  Destructive  tests  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  cut  out  by" 
machining  as  indicated  in  Fig.  21  and  tested  as  under: 

a)  Etch  test  —  One  of  the  cut  surfaces  of  the  test  specimen  shall  be 
prepared  and  etched  and  then  visually  examined  as  under  lb.t 
and  16.2. 

40 


IS:  1393-  1961 

b)  Bend  test  —  The  top  and  underside  of  the  two  bend  test  specimens 
shall  be  dressed  flush.  When  bent  through  180""  over  a  former 
thrice  the  thickness  of  the  sheet,  each  specimen  shall  show  no 
crack  or  defect  attributable  to  defective  workmanship.  Slight 
cracking  at  the  ends  of  the  weld  metal  occurring  during  bending 
may  be  disregarded.  One  specimen  shall  be  tested  with  the  face 
and  the  other  with  the  root  in  tension. 

c)  Nick  break  test  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  notched  as  indicated 
in  Fig.  21,  broken  open  along  the  weld  and  the  fractured  surface 
visually  examined  as  under  16.2. 

19.6  Test  No.  6  Oxy-Acetylene  Butt  Welds  in  Brass  Sheet  315  mm 
Thick 

19.6.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the 
code. 

19.6.2  Position  —  The  test  welds  shall  be  deposited  in  the  flat  position 
(slope  0^  rotation  0°). 

19.6.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  Fig.  21.  The  plate  edges  may  be  prepared  b^^  shearing, 
machining  or  filing.  The  tack  welds  shall  be  on  the  side  to  be  welded 
in  the  line  of  the  weld.  No  other  method  of  restraint  shall  be  used.  Dis- 
tortion or  misalignment  caused  by  tacking  may  be  corrected  before  the  test 
weld  is  deposited.  The  test  piece  shall  be  supported  in  such  a  manner 
that  contact  with  the  bench  or  other  material  does  not  provide  a  backing 
for  the  joint. 

19.6.4  Filler  Rod  —  The  filler  rod  used  shall  be  3-15  mm  in  diameter 
and  of  the  type  as  specified  in  the  code. 

Note — -Suitable  flux  should  be  used. 

19.6.5  Deposition  of  Test  Weld  —  The  test  weld  shall  be  225  mm  long 
as  shown  in  Fig.  21.  The  weld  shall  be  deposited  in  a  single  run  using 
the  forward  method  in  flat  position. 

The  weld  shall  be  stopped  and  started  within  the  central  50  mm  of  the 
run.  A  sealing  run  on  the  reverse  side  is  not  permitted,  so  that  the  degree 
of  root  penetration  can  be  subsequently  examined. 

19.6.6  Assessment 

19.6.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 
for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  uniformity  of  surface,  degree 
of  undercut,  smoothness  of  joints,  freedom  from  surface  defects,  penetra- 
tion, etc,  as  under  16.1. 

41 


IS  :  1393  -  1961 


GAP  =  I  MIN,  T  MAX 


3 


^^    ^NO  ROOT  FACE  } 
4  I—  GAP  «  \  MIN.  T  MAX 


100 


100- 


T" 

50 


DISCARD 


FACE    BEND 


DISCARD 


NICK  BREAK 


DISCARD 


ROOT   BEND 


DISCARD        : 


SPECIMEN 


SPECWEN 


SPECIMEN 


i 


225 
■  TEST 
kWELO 


12 

"7 

50 


300 


•Weld  to  be  stopped  and  restarted  within  central  50  mm  of  run. 
All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  21     Oxy-Acetylene  Butt  Welds  in  Pure  Aluminium  and 
Brass  Sheets  3*15  mm  Thick 


42 


IS:  1393-  1961 

19.6.6.2  Destructive  tests  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  cut  out  by 
machining  as  indicated  in  Fig.  21  and  tested  as  under: 

a)  Etch  test  —  One  of  the  cut  surfaces  of  the  test  specimen  shall 
be  prepared  and  etched  and  then  visually  examined  as  under  16.1 
and  16.2. 

b)  Bend  test  —  The  top  and  underside  of  the  two  bend  test  specimens 
shall  be  dressed  flush.  When  bent  through  180°  over  a  former 
thrice  the  thickness  of  the  sheet,  each  specimen  shall  show  no 
crack  or  defect  attributable  to  defective  workmanship.  Slight 
cracking  at  the  ends  of  the  weld  metal  occurring  during  bending 
may  be  disregarded.  One  specimen  shall  be  tested  with  the  face 
and  the  other  with  the  root  tension. 

c)  Nick  break  test  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  notched  as  indicated 
in  Fig.  21,  broken  open  along  the  weld  and  the  fractured  surface 
visually  examined  as  under  16.2. 

19.7  Test  No.  7   Oxy-Acetylene   Fusion   Butt  Weld  in  Cast   Iron 
Plate  12  mm  Thick 

19.7.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  code. 

19.7.2  Position  —  The  test  piece  shall  be  in  fiat  position  (slope  0°, 
rotation  0° )  only. 

19.7.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the  re- 
quirements of  Fig.  22.  The  edge  may  be  prepared  by  machining  or  grind- 
ing or  cast  plates  with  prepared  edges  may  be  used.  Tack  welds,  if  used, 
shall  be  on  the  side  to  be  welded  and  in  the  line  of  the  weld.  No  other 
form  of  restraint  shall  be  used.  The  test  piece  shall  be  supported  in  such  a 
manner  that  contact  with  the  bench  or  other  material  does  not  provide  a 
backing  for  the  joint.  Pre-heating  the  plates  prior  to  welding  with  the 
blow  pipe  shall  be  permitted. 

19.7.4  Filler  Rod  —  The  filler  rod  shall  be  6  mm  in  diameter  and  of 
the  type  specified  in  the  code. 

Note — -A  suitable  flux  shall  be  used. 

19.7.5  Deposition  of  Test  Weld  —  The  deposit  shall  be  150  mm  in  length 
as  shown  in  Fig.  22,  using  forward  method. 

19.7.6  Assessment 

19.7.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 
for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  degree  of  undercut,  freedom 
from  surface  defects,  penetration,  etc,  as  under  16.1. 

19.7.6.2  Destructive  test  —  The  test  specimen  shall  be  cut  by  machin- 
ing as  indicated  in  Fig.  22  and  tested  as  under; 

Nick  break  test  ^~  The  test  specimen  shall  be  notched  as  indicated 
in  Fig,  22,  broken  open  along  the  weld  and  the  fractured  surface 
visually  examined  for  hard  spots  and  as  under  16.2. 

43 


IS:  1393-  1961 


50 


BO- 


ISO 


D      I       S 


0  E  S  T  R  U 


S      P      E 


D     I      S 


C  T 


1  V 


R       D 


E      TEST 


MEN 


R       D 


50 


50 


50 


^%0  TO  9Sy 


^z: 


ROOT  FACE  1 


1 


JU 


GAP     1    MIN 
1*5  MAX 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  22    Oxy-Acetylene  Fusion  Butt  Weld  in  Cast  Iron  Plate  12  mm  Thick 

19.8  Test   No.   8   Oxy-Acetylene   Braze-Butt   Welds   in    Cast  Iron 
Plate  12  mm  Thick 

19.8.1  Parent  Metal  —  The  parent  metal  shall  be  as  specified  in  the  code. 

19.8.2  Position  —  The  test  weld  shall  be  deposited  in  the  appropriate 
position : 

Flat  (slope  0^   rotation  0") 

Vertical  (  slope  90"  )   upward   method 


44 


IS:  1393-  1961 

19.8.3  Assembly  for  Welding  —  The  test  piece  shall  conform  to  the  re- 
quirements of  Fig.  23.  The  edges  may  be  prepared  by  machining  or  cast 
plates  with  prepared  edges  may  be  used.  Surface  oxide  may  be  removed 
by  filing,  machining,  chiselhng,  shotblasting,  etc.  A  ground  finish  is 
not  recommended. 

19.8.4  Filler  Rod  —  The  filler  rod  shall  be  6  mm  in  diameter  and  of 
the  type  specified  in  the  code.  , 

NoTK  — A  suitable  liuK  shaU  be  ust-d. 

19.8.5  Deposition  of  Test  Weld  —  The  deposit  shall  be  150  mm  in  length 
as  shown  in  Fig.  23,  using  forward  method. 

19.8.6  Assessment 

19.8.6.1  Visual  examination  —  The  weld  shall  be  visually  examined 
for  dimension  of  deposit,  shape  of  profile,  degree  of  imdercut,  freedom  from 
surface  defects,  penetration,  etc,  as  under  16.1. 

19.8.6.2  Destructive  test  —  The  test  specimens  shall  be  cut  by  machin- 
ing as  indicated  in  Fig.  23  and  the  cut  face  shall  be  prepared  and  polished. 
The  joint  shall  show  satisfactory  penetration,  adliesion  and  freedom  from 
porosity  in  all  sections  examined. 

20.  RE-TEST  FOR  INITIAL  QUALIFICATION  TEST 

20.1  In  case  a  trainee  fails  to  meet  the  requirements  of  one  or  more  tests 
mentioned  under  19.1  to  19.8,  a  re-test  may  be  allowed  immediately  or 
after  some  further  training  on  the  following  conditions: 

a)  An  immediate  re-test  shall  consist  of  two  test  welds  of  each  type 
in  which  the  trainee  failed.  The  re-test  welds  shall  meet  all  the 
requirements  specified  for  such  welds. 

b)  If  the  re-test  is^  made  after  the  trainee  has  had  further  training 
or  practice,  the  complete  initial  qualification  test  shall  be  re- 
peated. 

20.2  Validity  of  Initial  Qualification  Test  Certificiates 

20.2.1  The  certification  implied  in  passing  of  the  initial  qualification 
test  is  valid  only  when  the  holder  is  employed  as  a  welder  within  six 
months  of  the  passing  of  the'  test.  The  certification  shall  lapse  auto- 
matically if,  for  any  reason,  he  has  not  worked  as  a  welder  for  a  period  of 
six  months  or  more.  Such  lapsed  certification  shall  be  re-instated  pro- 
vided annual  tests  specified  under  19  are  passed. 

21.  ANNUAL  TESTS 

21,1  General  —  The  annual  tests  to  be  taken  by  a  welder,  and  the  results 
of  which  are  to  be  entered  on  his  record  book  {see  7  ),  shall  comprise  of 
making  test  pieces  and  testing  procedure  as  given  under  19,1  to  19,8. 

45 


18:1393-1961 


150 


50 


0     I      S 


0  E  S  T  R  U 


S      P      E 


D     I      S 


C  T 


5  0 * 


I  V 


R      0 


E      TEST 


MEN 


R       0 


^ftO  TO  90^^ 


^Z 


ROOT  FACE  1 


TJU 


GAP   1     MIN 
1«5  MAX 


iJ       II  t-ROCTFACEl 


50 


50 


50 


\l 


GAP      1    MIN 
V5  MAX 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  23     Oxy- Acetylene  Braze-Butt  Welds  in  Cast  Iron  Plate  12  mm  Thick 


46 


IS:  1393-  1961 


22.  PERIODIC  CONTROL  TEST 


22.1  The  periodic  control  test  consists  of  making  butt  welds  and  test- 
ing these  as  per  initial  qualification  test  and  should  be  done  at  regular 
intervals  of  six  months.  Welders  engaged  continually  on  work  that  is 
subject  to  examination  by  some  non-destructive  testing  method,  such  as 
radiographic,  need  not  be  subjected  to  the  periodic  control  test.  The 
preparation  of  test  piece  and  testing  procedure  for  the  periodic  control 
test  shall  be  same  as  those  prescribed  for  the  initial  qualification  test. 

23.  RE-TESTS  FOR  ANNUAL  TEST  AND  PERIODIC 
CONTROL  TEST 

23.1  Re-Tests  for  Annual  Test —  If  the  welder  fails  in  the  annual  test, 
although  periodic  control  tests  have  not  shown  any  specific  reason  to 
question  his  ability,  he  shall  be  re-tested  immediately.  The  re-test  shall 
consist  of  two  test  welds  of  each  type  on  which  he  fails.  The  test  welds 
shall  meet  all  the  requirements  specified  for  such  welds.  If  the  trainee 
fails  in  such  a  re-test,  he  shall  be  employed  on  unimportant  work  for 
some  period  and  then  resubmitted  to  the  initial  qualification  test. 

23.2  Re-Tests  for  Periodic  Control  Test  —  If  the  results  of  the  periodic 
control  tests  indicate  that  there  is  some  reason  to  question  the  welder's 
ability,  then  he  shall  be  submitted  to  the  tests  prescribed  for  the  annual 
test.  If  he  fails  in  this  test,  he  shall  be  put  on  unimportant  work  for  a 
period  and  then  resubmitted  to  the  initial  qualification  test.  The  welder 
shall  not  be  permitted  to  re-start  on  important  work  until  he  has  passed 
the  annual  test  or  the  initial  qualification  test,  as  the  case  may  be. 

24.  POSITION  FOR  TEST  WELDS 

7A*l  In  the  initial  qualification  test,  the  annual  test  and  the  periodic 
control  test,  the  position  for  the  test  welds  would  depend  on  the  weld- 
ing positions  for  which  the  trainee  or  welder  is  to  be  certified  or  passed. 
The  minimum  requirements  of  test  welds  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  VIII 
under  Appendix  F. 

24.2  The  entries  made  in  the  Record  Book  {see  7  )  shall  have  a  reference 
to  the  welding  positions  for  which  the  tests  have  been  conducted  and 
passed. 


47 


IS:  1393-  1961 

APPENDIX  A 

{Clause  7.2) 
RECOMMENDED  FORM  FOR  RECORD  BOOK 

(  Page  1  of  Book  ) 

(  Name  of  Training  Establishment ) 

(City) 

(State) 

This  Record  Book  certifies  that 

( Full  name  of  trainee  ) 

whose  signature  and  identification  are  shown  on  the  reverse,  has  com- 
pleted a  course  of  oxy-acetylene  welding  and  cutting  to  the  Indian  Stan- 
dard Code  of  Practice  for  Training  and  Testing  of  Oxy-Acetylene  Welders 
( IS  :  1393-1961  )  and  has  fulfilled  all  the  requirements  prescribed  therein. 
The  duration  of  the  course  and  the  details  of  the  tests  which  the  trainee 
has  successfully  passed  are  stated  on  the  reverse. 


Official  Seal  of 
Training  Establishment 


( Signature  of  Training 
Establishment  Officer ) 


(  Designation  of  Officer  ) 


(  Date  of  Issue  ) 


48 


15:1395-  1951 


(  Page  2  of  Book  ) 


Photograph  of 
Trainee 


Title  of  Course 

Duration  of  Conrse: 

Total  hours         

Hours  of  actual  welding  practice 

Hours  of  observation  of  welding,  prepar- 
ing plates  for  welding,  testing  speci- 
mens, etc . 

Hours  of  instruction  in  theory     

Visible  Identification  Marks  

1)  •  •  .  

2) ( Signature  of  Trainee ) 

Tests  in  which  the  Trainee  has  passed  the  Initial  Qualification  Test 


Description 
OF  Welds 


Position  of 
Welding 


Date 

OF 

Test 


Remarks 


♦Tests 

NOT 

Taken 


Section  I 

Butt  —  Mild 
Steel  3-15  mm 

Fillet    —     Mild 
Steel  1-60  mm 

Corner  —  Mild 
Steel  1'60  mm 

Mild  Steel  Tube 
up  to  1-60  mn 
wall  thickness 


Flat 

Vertical  (upward) 

Horizontal-vertical 
Vertical  (upward) 

Flat 
Vertical  ( upward ) 

Flat 
All-position 


o 


§ 

Ah 

* 


*A  punch  mark  in  this  column  is  an  indication  that  the  trainee  did  not  take 

-(or  he  fail  Of  1  to  pass  )  the  test  in  the  relevant  position. 


49 


(  Continued  ] 


18:1393-1961 


( Page  2  of  Book)  —  Contd 


Description  Position  of  Date  of        Remarks    *Tests 

OF  Welds  Welding  Test  not 

Taken 


Section  II 


Cast-iron  — 
Fusion  Weld- 
ing 

Cast-iron  — 
Braze  Welding 


Flat 


Flat 
Vertical  ( up- 
ward method  ) 


o 


Brass-Butt  — 
345  mm 

Aluminium- 
Butt~3-15  mm 

Oxygen  Cutting 

Flame  Gouging 


Flat 


Flat 


o 


*A  punch  mark  in  this  cohimn  is  an  indication  that  the  trainee  did  not  take 
(or  he  failed  to  pass)  the  test  in  the  relevant  position. 


{Signature  of  Instructor) 


50 


18:1393-1961 


(Pages  3  to  12  of  Book; 
Record  of  Annual  Tests 


Description 

Position  of               Date         Remarks     *Tests 

OF  Welds 

Welding              of  Test 

NOT 

Taken 

Section  I 

- 

Butt  —  Mild 

Flat 

Steel  3-15  mm 

Vertical  ( up- 

ward ) 

Fillet  — Mild 

Horizon  tal-verti  cal 

o 

Steel  1-60  mm 

Vertical  ( up- 

en 

ward  ) 

Corner  —  Mild 

Flat 

O 

Steel  1-60  mm 

Vertical  (  up- 

u* 

o; 

\ 

ward  ) 

A 

Mild  Steel  Tube 

Flat 

up  to  1*60  mm 

All-position 

::3 
* 

wall  thickness 

Section  II 

Cast-Iron  — 

Flat 

c 

Fusion  Weld- 

ing 

-M 

Cast-Iron  Braze 

Flat 

o 

Welding 

Vertical  ( up- 

ward method  ) 

■4~> 

Brass-Butt  — 

Flat 

+-> 

3-15  mm 

Aluminium- 

Flat 

^ 

Butt  ^3-15  mm 

u 

c 

Oh 

Ox3'gcn  Cutting 

Flame  Gouging 

* 

*A  punch   tuark  in  ihis  column  is  an  indicalifui  tliat  tiic  trainee  did  not  take 
(  or  he  failed  to  pass  )   th<"   test  in   the   relevant  positisin. 

(Particulars  of  Shoj)  or  Factory    Oihcial  Seal  of    (Signature  of  Officer) 
conducting  Tests  )  Ofhce  or 

Factory        (  Designation  of  Officer  ) 


(  Date  of  Issue  ) 


51 


IS:  1393-  1961 


(Pages  13  to  16  of  Book) 
Record  of  Periodic  Tests  and  Special  Tests  Taken 


Description  of  Test      

Remarks  about  passing  of  Test 


(  Particulars  of  Shop  or  Factory    Official  Seal  of      (  Signature  of  Officer  ) 
conducting  Test )  Office  or 

Factory  ^  Designation  of  Officer  ) 


Date  of  Issue  ) 


APPENDIX   B 

[Clause  8;2) 
RECOMMENDED  DESIGN  OF  POSITIONING  EQUIPMENT 

B-1.  INTRODUCTION 

B-1.1  The  positioning  equipment  is  designed  to  hold  and  position  plates 
while  the  trainee  is  busy  in  performing  welding  exercises  and  tests.  The 
purpose  of  such  equipment  is  to  provide  "a  convenrent  method  for  holding 
any  kind  of  joint  (  butt  joint,  lap  joint,  tee  joint  or  corner  joint )  so  that 
it  may  be  welded  in  the  flat,  horizontal,  vertical  or  overhead  position. 

B-1.2  The  plates  shall  be  tack  welded  to  form  the  specimen  before  fixing 
it  in  the  positioning  equipment, 

B-1,3  This  appendix  describes  the  general  features  of  the  positioning 
device  and  illustrates  its  application. 

B-1.4  The  equipment  can  be  readily  constructed  in  the  average  machine 
shop  and  welding  shop.     One  should  be  provided  for  each  welding  booth. 

B-2.  DESCRIPTION  OF  EQUIPMENT 

B-2.1  One  type  of  complete  positioning  ec|uipmcnt,  including  all  jigs  and 
fixtures,  is  illustrated  ii:  Fig.  24  and  the  details  are  as  sliown. 

52 


IS :  1393  -  1961 


SET  UP  FOR  HORIZONTAL- VERTICAL  WELOWO, 

FOR  VERTICAL  WELDING  TURN  THROUGH 

90*  IN  THE  DIRECTION  SHOWN 


SET  UP  FOR  FLAT  AND   OVERHEAD  WELDING 


1.  Working  table  4.  Sliding  portion  of  column        7.  Plate  holder 

2.  Column  5.  Horizontal  arm  8.  Screw  to  hold  the 

3.  Screw  for  fixing  the  slid-        6.  Screws     for     fixing     the  specimen 
ing  portion  of  column                  horizontal  arm                          9.  Specimen 

Fig.  24  Illustration  of  All  Position  Jig 


53 


IS:1393-1961 

B-2.2  Figures  25A  to  25D  illustrate  the  orientation  of  plates  for  butt 
welding  in  the  fiat,  horizontal-vertical,  vertical  and  overhead  positions. 
The  orientation  of  plates  for  fillet  welding  in  the  flat,  horizontal,  vertical, 
vertical  and  overhead  positions*  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  26A  to  26D. 


AXIS  or  WELD 
HORIZONTAL- 


PLATES 
VERTICAL 


^PLATES 
HORrZONTAL 


AXIS  OF   WELD 
HORIZONTAL 


25A    Position  of  Plates 
for  Flat  Butt  Weld 


25  B  Position  of  Plates  for 
Horizontal-Vertical  * 
Butt  Weld 


-AXIS  or  WELD 
VERTICAL 


AXIS   OF   WELD 
HORIZONTAL 


25C  Position  of  Plates     25D  Position  of  Plates 

for   Vertical  Butt  for  Overhead  Butt 

Weld  Weld 


Fig.  25    Positions  of  Plates  for  Butt  Welds 
54 


IS:  1393-  1961 


-THROAT   OF   WELD 

VERTICAL        /-WELD  6 

-WELD  V 


-AXtS  OF  WCLO 
HORIZONTAL 


-AXIS    OF   WELD 
HORIZONTAL 

THtOAT  Of  WILD  TO  M  <•«  «»TlC*t. 
K>|lTtOH  (»AMK  A*  WttO  V)  ■MtH 
MAKING    MLB   '•* 


-PLATES 

HORIZONTAL 


26A  Position  of  Plates  for 
Flat  Fillet  Weld 


26B  Position    of    Plates    for    Hori- 
zontal-Vertical Fillet  Weld 


AXIS  or  trcLO 

HOmZONTAL 


26C  Position  of  Plates  for 
Vertical  Fillet  Weld 

Fig.  26     Position  of  Plates  for  Fillft  Welds 


26D  Position  of  Plates  for 
Overhead  Fillet  Weld 


APPENDIX   C 

[Clause  8.3) 

ACCESSORIES  AND  EQUIPMENT 
RECOMMENDED  FOR  TRAINING  ESTABLISHMENT  FOR 

WELDERS 

G-1.  SHOP  MACHINES  AND  ACCESSORIES 

C-1.1  The  training  establishment  shall  be  provided  with  the  follo\ving 
shop  and  necessary  equipment: 

a)  Heavy  work  bench  with  machinist's  or  blacksmith^s  vice  weighing 
30  kg  or  more; 


55 


IS:  1393-  1961 

b)  Plate  shear  for  preparing  plates  for  welding  and  for  cutting  test 

specimens ; 

c)  Two-ended   pedestal  grinder  with   25x3    cm    (or  larger)   course 
wheels  and  wheel  dresser; 

d)  Heavy  power  hack-saw  (  preferably  with  25  cm  width  capacity ) 
or  horizontal  metal  band  saw; 

e)  Portable  or  flexible  shaft  grinder; 

f)  Equipment  for  machining  test  specimens; 

g)  Bend  test  device  with  hydraulic  jack  of  8  metric  tonnes  or  larger 
capacity; 

h)  Break  or  rupture  device  with  hydraulic  jack  of  8  metric  tonnes 
or  larger  capacity; 

j)  Fire  extinguishers,  chemical  (non-foam  type); 

k)  Fire  buckets,  water; 

m)  Sand  bags  for  fire  protection; 

n)  Scrap  box,  90x60x30  cm; 

p)  Chart-board  for  progress  chart,  instructional  charts  and  notices; 

q)  Small  platform  scales  for  weighing  out  filler  rods  (  optional ); 

r)   First  aid  kit; 

s)    Provision  for  sterihzing  welding  goggles,  if  there  is  likelihood  of 
these  being  used  by  more  than  one  trainee; 

t)   Anvil,  45  kg  or  heavier; 

u)  Display  board  for  sample  specimens  of  welding  exercises;  and 

v)  Hot  metal  quenching  tank  (  a  minimum  of  one  tank  between  two 

trainees  ). 

G-2.  SMALL  TOOLS  AND  ACCESSORIES 

C-2.1  While   welding,    the   following   equipment   should   be   available   to 
each  trainee: 

a)  Sledge  hammer  for  rupturing  check  test  specimens, 

b)  Ball  peen  hammer, 

c)  C-clamps, 

d)  Cold  chisels, 

e)  Centre  punches, 

f)  Scribers, 

g)  Metal  rules, 
h)  Try  squares, 

56 


IS  :  1393  -  1961 

j)  Sets  ot  metal  marking  steel  stamps  ( letters  and  figures  5  mm ), 

k)  Small  steel  wedges, 

m)  Medium  coarse  files  for  rounding  edges  of  test  specimens,  and 

n)  Soapstone  marking  crayon. 

G-3.  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  EACH  TRAINEE 
WHILE  WELDING 

C-3.1  Whiie  welding,  each  trainee  shall  be  supplied  with  the  following 
equipment: 

a)  Oxy-acetylene  welding  blow  pipe  with  tips  or  welding  heads  suit- 
able for  welding  1-6  mm  to  12  mm  thick  mild  steel, 

b)  Oxygen  regulator, 

c)  Acetylene  regulator  (where  acetylene  from  cylinder  is  used), 

d)  About  5-m  length  of  suitable  oxygen  hose  with  connections  and 
hose  clips, 

e)  About  5-m  length  of  suitable  acetylene  hose  with  connections  and 
hose  clips, 

f)  Spark  lighter, 

g)  Pair  of  short  pick  up  tongs  or  heavy  gas  pipe  pliers, 

h)  Goggles  with  suitable  coloured  filter  lens  and  clear  cover  glass, 

j)  Safety  goggles  for  use  while  grinding  specimens, 

k)  Wire  scratch  brush,  and 

m)  Leather  gloves  or  gauntlets  (if  necessary). 

C-3.2  In  addition  to  the  above,  the  following  equipment,  one  set  each 
per  6  to  10  trainees,  shall  be  provided: 

a)  Oxy-acetylene  cutting  blow  pipe  with  oxygen  and  acetylene  regu- 
lator, hoses,  etc, 

b)  Oxy-acetylene  gouging  blow  pipe  with  oxygen  and  acetylene  regu- 
lator, hoses,  etc. 

C-4.  EQUIPMENT  FOR  TRAINEE  OBSERVERS  AND 
INSTRUCTORS  WHILE  OBSERVING 

C-4.1  While  welding,  each  instructor  and  trainee  shall  be  supplied  with 
the  following  equipment: 

a)  Goggles  with  suitable  coloured  filter  lens  and  clear  cover  glass, 
and 

b)  Weld  gauges. 

Note  —  Facilities  for  showing  motion  pictures,  filmstrips  and  slides  have  been 
found  to  be  of  assistance. 

57 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


APPENDIX    D 

{ Clause  9.2 ) 

RECOMMENDED  FORM  OF  TRAINEE  PROGRESS  CHART 


IS:  1393-  l%i 


Section  I  —  Gkoup  B 


=  t; 

BJ3 

3 

5 

£  > 

E^ 

-ii 

^ 

;« 

o  a 

c 

1    c 

F 

P. 

Fi 

a'" 

■So' 

^ 

a. 

i 

^ 

cr. 

■ji 

:/: 

n 

:S - 

•S  Jl 

(- 

r^ 

f- 

jt 

3'^' 

3— . 

i 

't 

i 

-- 

^t; 

a  K 

U 

U 

u 

-, 

B3      B4  i  B5  I  B6  i 


Sbction  I  —  Group  C 


£     ;     S     ' 

a  I    a.  i  ^ 


4  "O       .^  -a 


CS   :  C6  :  C7  ■  C8  j 


Section  I  —  Group  D 


Section  II  —  Group  E 


Dl     D2  I    D3      D4:  D5  i 


^^  '^1  '^7  ^- 


El    i     E2        E3    1    E+      E5     E6 


Section  II  —  Group  F 


Section  II  — Group  G 


?;  U    ■   S  U    .    C        D        73 


KI         i-2    .     1-3         F4       F5     1'6  : 


I  ■  o 


Section  H— Group  H 


^I     i    G2    :  G3  !  Gt  i 


U         U         :/! 


HI  :  H2  ■•  H3  '  lU 


I  Comments,  Including; 

!  the  Class  or  Division 
in  which  the  Trainee 
IS  Placed  or  Reasons 
for  Discontinum({  the 
Course 


59 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


18:1393-  1961 

APPENDIX    E 

{Clause   10.1) 

RECOMMENDED  SYLLABUS  FOR  TRAINING  COURSE 

( Based  on  40  working  hours  per  week ) 

Details  of  Course  Position        Hours  of 

Instruction 


1st  Week        Theory  —  10 

Welding  and  cutting  equip- 
ment safety  in  welding 

Demonstrations,  Films  and  Dis- 
cussions —  8 

Fitting  up  the  equipment,  set- 
ting gas  pressures,  flame  set- 
ting, etc 

Practical  —  22 

Fitting  up  the  equipment,  set- 
ting gas  pressures,  flame  set- 
ting, running  beads  with  and 
without  filler  rods  Flat 

Butt  welds  in  1*60  mm  mild  steel 
plates  Flat 

2nd  Week      Theory  —  6 

Welding  techniques 

Welding  metallurgy  —  mild  steel 

( sheet  metal ) 
Welding  terms  and  symbols 

Demonstrations,  Films  and  Dis-  —  9 

cussions 

Practical  —  25 

Butt   welds   in  1-60    mm    mild 

steel  sheets  Flat 

Butt   welds   in  1-60    mm   mild 

steel  sheets  Vertical 

Butt   welds   in  3  •  1 5    mm    mild 

steel  sheets  Flat 


61 


IS:  1393  -  1961 


RECOMMENDED  SYLLABUS  FOR  TRAINING  COURSE  —  Confrf 


3rd  Week 


4th  Week 


5th  Week 


Details  of  Course 

Theory 

Characteristics  of  filler  rods 
Possibilities    and    limitation    of 
welding 

Demonstrations,  Films  and  Dis- 


position 


Hours  of 

Instruction 


cussions 

— 

11 

Practical 

— 

25 

Butt    welds    in    3*15    mm 

mild 

steel  sheets 

Vertical 

Corner  welds  in   1-60  mm 

mild 

steel  sheets 

Flat 

Corner  welds  in  1*60   mm 

mild 

steel  sheets 

Vertical 

Theory 

Inspection  and  testing  of  welds 
Costing 

Demonstrations,  Films  and   Dis- 


cussions 

— 

7 

Practical 

— 

28 

Butt   welds   in   mild   steel    tube 

1-60  mm  wall  thickness 

Flat 
Flat  and 

Welds  of  branch  connections    > 

Horizontal- 

Plate  to  tube  welds                  J 

vertical 

Theory 

— 

-9 

Weld     metallurgy  —  cast     iron, 

aluminium,  brass  and  bronze 

Demonstrations,  Films  and   Dis- 

cussions 

— 

5 

Practical 

— 

26 

Butt  welds  in   1*60  mm  alumi- 

nium sheet 

Flat 

Butt  welds  in  3-15   mm  alumi- 

nium sheet 

Flat 

Butt  welds  in  1*60  mm  brass  sheet 

Flat 

Butt  welds  in  3-15  mm  brass  sheet 

Flat 

62 


IS:  1393  -  1%1 
RECOMMENDED  SYLLABUS  FOR  TRAINING  COVKSE  ~    Conid 

Hours  of 
Instruction 


2 
30 


Details  of  Course 

P  OS  ill 

6th  Week 

Theory 

Welding  of  castings 

Demonstrations,  Films  and   Dis- 

— 

cussions 

— 

Practical 

— 

Fusion  butt  welds  in  cast  iron 
Braze-butt  welds  in  cast  iron 

Flat 
Flat 

7th  Week 

Theory 
Hardfacing 

Demonstrations,  Films  and   Dis- 

cussions 

— 

Practical 

— 

Braze-butt  welds  in  cast  iron 
Hardfacing 

Vertic; 

8th  Week 

Theory 

Oxygen  cutting 
Demonstrations,  Films  and   Dis- 

cussions 

— 

Practical 

— 

Manual  oxygen  cutting 
Flame  gouging 

15 

22 


13 

22 


APPENDIX    F 

(  Clause  13.1.4  and  -Appendix  E  ) 

DETAILED  SUGGESTIONS  COVERING  EACH  SECTION  AND 
GROUP  OF  EXERCISES 

F-1.  GENERAL 

F-1.1  In  the  suggested  list  of  exercises  { see  F-2.1  and  Table  VIII ),  no 
specific  recommendations  are  made  as  to  the  number  of  times  each  exer- 
cise should  be  repeated.     The  trainee  should  be  required  to  perform  each 


63 


IS:1393-1%1 

exercise  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  instructor,  before  being  allowed  to  ad- 
vance to  the  next  exercise. 

F-1.2  It  is  recommended  that  the  trainee  should  test  as  many  of  his 
welds  as  possible  as  soon  as  these  have  been  cooled  in  still  air.  Further, 
the  instructor  should  inspect  the  test  weld  and  point  out  to  the  trainee 
any  defects  that  may  be  in  evidence  and  the  reason  for  such  defect  or 
failure  of  the  joint.  The  techniques  of  testing  shall  be  as  prescribed  for 
the  check  tests. 

F-1.3  It  is  recommended  that  the  size  of  the  specimens,  as  indicated  in 
the  various  illustrations,  be  maintained. 

F-1,4  It  is  recommended  that  the  pieces  be  set  up  and  tack  welded  be- 
fore welding. 

F-l*5  To  suit  specific  welding  training  requirements,  special  outlines  may 
be  made  from  among  the  suggested  exercises  given  in  Table  VIII. 

F-2.  EXERCISES 

F-2.1  Exercises  suggested  in  Sections  I  and  II  are  given  in  Table  VIII. 


64 


TABLE  VIII     EXERCISES 

{Clattses  F-1.5  and  F-2.1  ) 


ExKH- 

Unit 
Operation 

(2) 

Parent 
Metal 

(3) 

Filler  Rod 

Flame 

No. 

(1;) 

*Type 
(4) 

Size 
(5) 

(6) 

Section  I 

—  Group  A 

Al 

Fitting   of   equip- 
ment 

— 



— 

— 

A2 

Lighting  and  ad- 
justing flame 

-~~ 

~— " 

Neutral-oxi- 
dizing   and 
carburizing 

A3 

Depositing      con- 
tinuous        bead 
weld      with      or 
without  filler  rod 

Mild    steel 
sheet   1-60 
mm 

9.1  or 
9.2 

1-60  mm 

Neutral 

Section  I 
Bl 


—  Group  B 

Making  butt  welds 
in  flat  position 


Mild  steel 
sheet  1-60 
mm 


9.1  or 
9.2 


1*60  mm 


Neutral 


•Clause  reference  of  IS:  1278-1958. 


Instructions 
(7) 


Practise  fitting  up  the  equipment, 
adjusting  gas  pressures,  testing 
for  leaks 

practise  the  adjustment  of  flame 
to  carburizing,  neutral  and  oxi- 
dizing, noting  the  difference  in  the 
flame  appearance  and  melt  con- 
dition 

Practise  depositing  continuous 
beads  from  left  to  right  (  forward 
method  ),  ensuring  that  the  bead 
welds  are  uniformly  straight, 
have  even  build  up,  and  are  free 
from  under-cutting  and  oxidation 
or  burning 


practise  making  butt  welds  by  the 
forward  technique;  ensure  mak- 
ing correct  tacks,  alignment.  Try 
and  obtain  full  fusion,  feed  rod 
uniformly  in  the  weld  pool  to 
avoid  undercutting  and  to  ensure 
full  build-up.  Stop  the  weld  in 
the  centre  and  start  again.  Try 
to  obtain  a  smooth  joint 


( Continued  )        ^ 


C» 


^ 

sO 

^ 


TABLE  VIII     EXERCISES  -  Contd 


Exer- 

Unit 

Parent 

Filler  Rod 

FLAM] 

cise 

Operation 

Metal 

^ 

A— ^ ^ 

No. 

*Type 

Size 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

Section 

I  ^  Group  B  [Coutd] 

1 

B2 

Making  butt  welds 
in   vertical   posi- 
tion 

Mild  steel 
sheet  1-60 
mm 

9.1  or 
9.2 

1-60  mm 

Neutral 

B3 

Making  butt  welds 
in  fiat  position 

Mild  steel 
sheet  3-15 
mm 

9.1  or 
9.2 

3-15  mm 

Neutral 

B4 

Making  check  test 
specimen  No,  1 

Mild  steel 
sheet  1-60 
mm 

9.1  or 
9.2 

1-60  mm 

Neutral 

a^ 

o 

B5  Making  check  test 

specimen  No.  2 


B6  Making  check  test 

specimen  No.  3 


Mild  steel 
sheet  1-60 
mm 


Mild  steel 
-^heet  3-15 
mm 


9.1  or 
9.2 


9.1  or 
9.2 


1*60  mm 


Neutral 


3-15  mm 


Neutral 


♦Clause  reference  of  I.S  :  1278-1958. 


Instructions 


(7) 


Same  as  in  Bl 


Same  as  in  Bl 


Weld  the  joint  {  see  Fig.  6  )  in  a 
single  run  in  flat  position.  Stop 
the  weld  and  restart  within 
central  50  mm  of  run.  Test  the 
specimen  by  rupturing  and  etch- 
ing ( see  16  for  test  results 
required  ) 

Weld  the  joint  ( see  Fig.  6  )  in  a 
single  run  in  vertical  position  — 
upward  method.  Stop  the  weld 
and  restart  within  central  50  mm 
of  run.  Test  the  specimen  bv 
rupturing  and  etching  {  see  16  for 
test  results  required  ) 

Weld  the  joint  (  see  Fig.  6  )  in  a 
single  run  in  flat  position.  Stop 
the  weld  and  restart  within 
central  50  mm  of  run.  Test  the 
specimen  by  rupturing  and  etch- 
ing ( see  16  for  test  results 
required  ) 


(  Contimied  ) 


EXKK^ 

Unit 

1*ARENT 

Filler  Rod 

CISli 

Operation 

Metal 

^                              .A              .  _ 

No. 

♦Type              Size 

.    (1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4)                   (5) 

Section  I  —  Group  C 


TABLE   VIII  EXERCISES  —  Contd 

Flame 

(6) 


Instrqctions 


(7) 


CI 

Making  butt  welds 

Mild     steel 

9.1  or 

3-15     mm 

Neutral 

in    vertical   posi- 

sheet  3*15 

9.2 

and   1-60 

tion 

mm 

mm 

C2 

Making         corner 

Mild     steel 

9.1  or 

1*60  mm 

Neutral 

welds  in  flat  posi- 

sheet   1-60 

9.2 

tion 

mm 

C3 

Making         corner 

Mild     steel 

9.1  or 

1-60  mm 

Neutral 

welds  ill  vertical 

sheet    1-60 

9.2 

position 

mm 

C4 

Making  fillet  welds 

Mild     steel 

9.1  or 

1-60  mm 

Neutral 

in    .     horizontal- 

sheet    1-60 

9.2 

vertical    position 

mm 

C5 

Making  check  test 

Mild     steel 

9.1  ot 

2-50     mm 

Neutral 

specimen  No.  4 

sheet   3-15 
mm 

9.2 

or      1-60 
mm 

C6 


Making  check  test 
specimen  No.   5 


Mild  steel 
sheet  1-60 
mm 


9.1   or 
9.2 


1-60  mm 


-Clause  reference  of   IS:  1278-1958. 


Neutral 


Same  as  in  Bl 
Same  as  in  Bl 
Same  as  in  Bl 
Same  as  in  Bl 


Weld  the  joint  (  see  Fig.  6  )  in  a 
single  run  in  vertical  position  —  • 
upward  method.  Stop  the  weld 
and  restart  within  central  50  mm 
of  run.  Test  the  specimen  by 
rupturing  and  etching  (  see  16  for 
test  results  required  ) 

Weld  the  joint  {  see  Fig.  7  )  in  a 
single  run  in  fiat  position.  Stop 
the  weld  and  restart  within 
central  50  mm  of  run.  Test  the 
specimen  by  rupturing  and  etch- 
ing (  see  16  for  test  results 
required  ) 


i/5 


0^ 


(  Continued  )        ^ 


Exer- 
cise 
No. 
(1) 


'  Unit 
Operation 

(2) 


Parent 

Metal 


TABLE  VIII  EXERCISES  —  CoKftf 

Flame 


(3) 


Filler  Rod 
*. 

Size 

(5) 


•Type 
(4) 


Section  I  —  Group  C  (  Coiitd  ) 
C7  Making  check  test       Mild 


specimen  No.  6 


steel 
sheet  1-60 
mm 


9.1  or 
9.2 


♦Clause  reference  of  IS:  1278-1958. 


(6) 


oc 

C8 

Section 

Making  check  test 
specimen  No.  7' 

I— -Group  D 

Mild     steel 
sheet   1-60 
mm 

9.1  or 
9.2 

1-60  mm 

Dl 

Making  butt  welds 
in      mild      steel 
tubes      in      flat 
position 

Mild     steel 
tube     25 
mm  OD  — 
1*60       mm 

wall  thick- 

9.1 or 
9.2 

1*60  mm 

D2 

^  Making        branch 
joint      in      mild 
steel        tubes  — 
angles     —     45^ 
90\  135° 

ness 

Mild     steel 
tube      25 
mm    OD— 
160       mm 
wall  thick- 
ness 

9.1  or 
9.2 

1-60  mm 

1*60  mm         Neutral 


Neutral 


Neutral 


Neutral 


Instructions 


(7) 


Weld  the  joint  ( see  Fig.  7  )  in  a 
single  run  in  a  vertical  position  — 
upward  method.  Stop  the  weld 
and  restart  within  central  50  mm 
of  run.  Test  the  specimen  by 
rupturing  and  etching  {see  16  for 
test  results  required  ) 

Weld  the  joint  ( see  Fig.  8  )  in  a 
single  run  in  horizontal- vertical 
position.  Stop  the  weld  and 
restart  within  central  50  mm  of 
run.  Test  the  specimen  by 
rupturing  and  etching  [see  16  for 
test  results  required ) 

Same  as  in  Bl 


Same  as  in  Bl 


«3 


OS 


{  Continued ) 


TABLE  VIII     EXERCISES  —  Contd 


0^ 


Exer- 

Unit 

Parent 

Filler  Rod 

cise 
No. 

Operation 

Metal 

_—                      .A- 

♦Type           Size 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4)                (5) 

Section 

/  —  Group  D  (  Contd  ) 

D3 

Making      fillet 

Mild       steel 

9,1  or       1-60  mm 

welds  —  between 

tube  25  mm 

9.2 

tube  and  plate 

OD  — 1-60 
mm       wall 
thickness 

D4 

Making  check  test 

Mild       steel 

9.1  or        1-60  mm 

specimen  No.  8 

tube     25 
mm  OD  — 
1-60       mm 
wall  thick- 
ness 

9.2 

D5 

Making  check  test 

Mild       steel 

9.1  or        1-60  mm 

specimen  No.  9 

tube     25 
mm  OD  — 
1-60       ram 
wall  thick- 
ness 

9.2 

Section 

//  —  Group  E 

El 

Making  butt  welds 

Aluminium 

13.3           3-15  mm 

' 

in  aluminium  in 

sheet  1-60 

fiat  position 

mm 

Flame 


(6) 


Neutral 


Neutral 


Neutral 


Neutral 


Instructions 
(7) 


Same  as  in  Bl 


Weld  the  joint  (  see  Fig.  12  )  at  an 
angle  of  90°  in  one  pass  with  4  to 
5  mm  fillet  weld  in  horizontal- 
vertical  position.  Cut  the  tee 
into  four  pieces  by  sawing.  Test 
the  sections  by  polishing  and 
etching  (see  16  for  test  results 
required  ) 

Weld  the  joint  (  see  Fig.  13  )  in  one 
pass  with  4  to  5  mm  fillet  weld  in 
flat  and  horizontal -vertical  posi- 
tions. Cut  into  four  pieces.  Test 
the  sections  by  polishing  and 
etching  (see  16  for  test  results 
required ) 


Practise  making  butt  welds  in 
aluminium,  appreciate  the  neces- 
sity of  using  flux;  try  and  obtain 
full  fusion  and  penetration  with- 
out flux  entrapment 


♦Clause  reference  of  IS  :  1278-1958. 


(  Continued  )       os 


c» 


OS 


TABLE  VIII     EXERCISES  —  Contd 


Exer- 

Unit 

cise 

Operation 

No. 

(1) 

(2) 

Section 

//  —  Group  E  (  Con 

E2 

Making  butt  welds 

in   aluminium  in 

flat  position 

E3 

Making  butt  welds 

in    brass    in    flat 

position 

E4  Making  butt  welds 

in  brass  in  fiat 
position 

E5  Making  check  test 

specimen  Xo.   10 


E6  Making  check  test 

specimen  No.   11 

Section  II  —  Group  F 

Fl  Making  fusion 

butt  welds  in  cast 
iron  in  fiat  posi- 
tion 


Parent 
Metal 

(3) 


Aluminium 
sheet     3*15 
mm 

Brass    sheet 
1*60  mm 


Brass    sheet 
3-15  mm 

Aluminium 
sheet     3*15 
mm 


Brass    sheet 
3-15  mm 


Cast  iron 
plate  10 
mm 


Filler  KoD 


♦Type 

(4) 


11.2 


10.1 


Size 
(5) 


3*15  mm 


6  mm 


Flame 
(6) 


13.3  3-15  mm  Neutral 

11.2  3*15  mm  Oxidizing 

11.2  3-15  mm  Oxidizing 

13.3  3*15  mm  Neutral 


Oxidizinof 


Neutral 


Instructions 


(7) 


^^Clauso  reference  of   IS;  1278-1958. 


Same  as  in  El 


Practise  making  butt  welds  in 
brass,  appreciate  the  necessity  of 
using  oxidizing  flame  and  flux, 
try  and  obtain  full  fusion  and 
penetration 

Same  as  in  E3 


Weld  the  joint  (  see  Fig.  14)  in  a 
single  run  in  flat  position.  Stop 
the  weld  and  restart  within 
central  50  mm  of  run.  Test  the 
specimen  by  rupturing  and  etch- 
ing ( see  16  for  test  results 
required  ) 

do 


^Practise  making  butt  welds  in  cast 
iron  using  flux.  Try  making  full 
fusion  with  sufficient  penetration 
and  obtain  weld  deposit  free  from 
porosity 


(  Continued ) 


xn 


TABLE  VIII     EXERCISES  —  Contd 


Exer- 
cise 
No. 

(1) 

Section  J I  - 


Unit 
Operation 

(2) 
■  Group  F  (  Conid  ) 


Parent 
Metal 

(3) 


F2  Making         fusion 

butt  welds  in  cast 
iron  in  flat  posi- 
tion 

F3  Making  braze-butt 

welds  in  cast  iron 
in  flat  position 

F4  Making  braze-butt 

welds  in  cast  iron 
in  flat  position 

F5  Making  check  test 

specimen  No.  12 


F6  Making  check  test 

specimen  No.  13 


Cast  iron 
plate  12 
mm 

Cast  iron 
plate  10 
mm 


Cast    iron 

plate     12 

mm 
Cast    iron 

plate     12 

mm 


Cast    iron 
plate     10 

mm 


Filler  Rod 

r ^ 

*Type  ^ize 

(4)  (5) 


10.1  6  mm 

10.1  6  mm 

11.3  6  mm 

10.1  6  mm 


10.1 


5  mm 


Flame 

(6) 

Neutral 


Slightly  oxi- 
dizing 


Slightly  oxi- 
dizing 

Neutral 


Slightly  oxi- 
dizing 


Instructions 
(7) 


Same  as  in  Fl 


Practise  making  braze-butt  weld 
in  cast  iron,  obtaining  good  bond 
and  tinning,  full  penetration  and 
build  up,  weld  deposit  free  from 

porosity 
Same  as  in  F3 


Weld  the  joint  [see  Fig.  15(A) 
and  16]  in  flat  position  by  fusion 
welding  technique.  Cut  the  weld 
by  sawing.  Test  the  specimen  by 
rupturing  and  etching  (see  16  for 
test  results  required  ) 

Weld  the  joint  [see  Fig.  15(A)  or 
15(B)  and  16  ]  in  flat  position  by 
braze  welding.  Cut  the  weld  by 
sawing.  Test  the  specimen  by 
rupturing  and  etching  (see  16  for 
test  results  required  ) 


♦Clause  reference  of  IS  :  1278-1958. 


I 


(  Continued )       O^ 


iXER- 

Unit 

CISE 

Operation 

No. 

(1) 

(2) 

Parent 

Metal 

(3) 


TABLE  VIII  EXERCISES 

Filler  Rod 


♦Type 

(4) 


Size 
(5) 


Contd 
Flame 

(6) 


Instructions 
(7) 


CA 


Section  II  —  Group    G 

Gl  Making  braze-butt 

welds  in  cast  iron 
in  vertical  posi- 
tion 

G2  Making  braze-butt 

welds  in  cast  iron 
in  vertical  posi- 
tion 

G3  Depositing    hard- 

facing  rod 

G4  Making  check  test 

specimen  No.  14 


Section  II  —  Group  H 

HI  Manual       oxygen 

cutting 


Cast  iron 
plate  10 
mm 

Cast  iron 
plate  12 
mm 

Mild  steel 
10  mm 

Cast  iron 
plate  10 
mm 


♦Clause  reference  of  IS:  1278-1958. 


11.3 


11.3 


6  mm 


6  mm 


Slightly    oxi- 
dizing 


Slightly    oxi- 
dizing 


Choice  left  to  the  training  establish- 
ment 


10.1 


5  mm 


Shghtly    oxi- 
dizing 


Mild   steel  — 

12  mm 


Same  as  in  F3 


Same  as  in  F3 


According  to  the  directions  of  the 
maker  of  the  rod 

Weld  the  joint  [  see  Fig.  15(A)  or 
15(B)  and  16]  in  vertical  posi- 
tion —  upward  method,  by  braze- 
welding  technique.  Cut  the  weld 
by  sawing.  Test  the  specimen 
by  rupturing  and  etching  (  see  15 
for  test  results  required  ) 

Practice  making  straight  cuts, 
piercing  holes,  bevel  cuts,  etc; 
try  and  obtain  reasonabl)?-  clean 
smooth  edge  without  excessive 
top  melting  and  cutting  at  uni- 
form speed 


(  Contin%i€d ) 


Exer- 

Unit 

cise 

Operation 

No. 

(1) 

(2) 

Parent 

Metal 

(3) 


TABLE  VIII  EXERCISES  —  Contd 

Filler  Rod  Flame 


♦Type 
(4) 


Size 
(5) 


(6) 


Instructions 
(7) 


Section  II  —  Group  H  (  Contd  ) 
H2  Flame  gouging 


Mild  steel 
plate  12 
mm 


^ 

oo 


H3  Making  check  test      Mild  steel 

specimen  No.  15        plate     12 
mm 


H4         Making  check  test 
specimen  No.  16 


Practise  making  grooves  on  plates, 
removing  welds  from  *  T  '  joints 
without  damaging  the  plates, 
cutting  panhead  rivets,  etc 

Cut  a  75  mm  square  hole  in  the 
centre  of  a  150  X  150  mm  size 
plate  following  the  profile  as 
nearly  as  possible.  Test  the 
specimen  for  a  reasonably  clean 
cut  (  see  also  15.4.3  ) 

Remove  a  fillet  weld  from  a  tee 
joint.  Examine  that  no  damage 
has  been  done  to  the  plates  while 
removing  the  weh' 


OD 


0>» 


♦Clause  reference  of  IS :  1278-1958. 


§ 


18:1393-1961 

APPENDIX    G 

{Clause  17.2.1  ) 

RECOMMENDED  SAFETY  RULES 

Grl.  POSITIVE  RULES 

G-1.1  Wear  leather  gloves  (if  necessary),  adequate  clothing  and  heavy 
shoes,  tightly  laced. 

G-1.2  Wear  welding  goggles  when  welding  or  when  witnessing  demons- 
tration* 

G-1.3;  Remove  combustible  materials  from  the  vicinity  of  welding  or  gas 
cutting  operations. 

G-1.4  Get  prompt  first  aid  if  burnt  or  if  your  eyes  have  been  injured  by 
fl5mig  sparks. 

G-1.5  Wear  safety  goggles  when  chipping  or  grinding. 

G-1.6  Keep  welding  table  and  floor  clean  and  clear  of  short  length  of 
rods,  scraps  of  metal  and  carelessly  disposed  tools. 

G-1.7  Know  how  to  use  the  fire  extinguishers  and  memorize  their  loca- 
tion. 

G-1.8  See  that  hose  connections  are  tight  and  that  the  tip  of  the  torch 
is  clean. 

G-1.9  Make  proper  provision  for  venting  exhaust  gases  when  operating 
in  confined  spaces- 

G-2.  NEGATIVE  RULES 

G-2.1  Don't  look  at  a  welding  or  cutting  operation  with  the  naked  eye. 

G-2.2  Don't  use  cracked  or  defective  goggles. 

G-2,3  Don't  hang  a  torch  with  its  hose  on  regulators  or  cylinder  valves. 

G-2.4  Don't  pick  up  hot  objects. 

G-2.5  Don't  use  defective  equipment. 

G-2.6  Don't  weld  on  closed  containers  or  on  containers  that  have  held 
combustible  materials.  ( Secure  permission  from  the  instructor  before 
welding  on  any  container.) 

74 


IS:  1393-  1961 

G-2,7  Don't  weld  in  the  vicinity  of  inflammable  or  combustible  mate- 
rials. 

G-2.8  Don't  weld  in  confined  spaces  without  adequate  ventilation. 
G-2.9  Don't  attempt  to  repair  equipment. 

G-2.10  Don't  play  the  flame  on  cylinders,  hoses  or  other  equipment. 

Note  —  For  detailed  instructions  for  safety  and  health  requirements  in  elec- 
tric and  gas  welding  and  cutting  operations,  referefnce  should  be  made  to  IS:  818- 
1957  Code  of  Practice  for  Safety  and  Health  Requirements  in  Electric  and  Gas 
Welding  and  Cutting  Operations. 


APPENDIX    H 

[Clauses  19.1.6.2(a)  and  19.2.6.2(a)] 

*  SUGGESTED  METHODS  FOR  PREPARING 
ETCHED  SPECIMENS 


H-1.  MILD  STEEL 

H-1.1  Preparation  of  Surface  for  Etching  —  The  surface  should  be 
filed  with  a  coarse  file  until  all  deep  marks  are  removed.  It  should  then 
be  filed  at  right  angles  to  the  original  coarse  file  marks  with  a  smooth 
file.  The  smooth  filed  surface  should  be  polished  down  with  successively 
finer  grades  of  emery  paper,  for  example,  '  M  ',  *  F  *,  '  O  *,  '  00  ',  the  direc- 
tion of  polishbeing  being  at  right  angles  to  the  marks  made  by  the  previous 
paper  in  each  case.  Polishing  should  be  continued  until  the  scratches  of 
the  previous  paper  have  been  removed  before  proceeding  to  the  next  finer 
grade.  This  procedure  is  indicated  in  order  to  show  the  means  by  which 
a  first-class  finish  may  be  obtained. 

H-1.2  Etching  for  Macro-Examination  —  In  general  for  steel,  an  '  O  ' 
emery  finish  will  be  smooth  enough  for  a  satisfactory  etch  to  be  obtained 
for  macro-examination.  A  suitable  etching  solution  is  prepared  by  mix- 
ing the  following: 

a)  Concentrated  Nitric  Acid —  10  to  15  m\  (conforming  to  IS ;  264- 
1950  Specification  for  Nitric  Acid  ),  and 


♦The  methods  of  preparing  etched  specimens  are  suggested  for  convenience  and 
are  in  no  way  intended  to  bo  a  rigid  requirement  of  this  code. 


75 


IS:  1393-  1961 

b)  Denatured  Spirit  —  90  ml  (conforming  to  IS  :  324-1952  Specifica- 
tion for  Denatured  Spirit). 

H-2,  ALUMINIUM  AND  BRASS 

H-2.1  Preparation  of  Surface  for  Etching  —  The  surface  should  be 
filed  with  a  medium  file  until  all  deep  marks  are  removed.  It  should  then 
be  filed  at  right  angles  to  the  original  medium  file  marks  with  smooth  file 
until  the  surface  is  smooth  and  free  from  marks.  The  procedure  is  indi- 
cated so  tlint  a  good  finish  may  be  obtained. 

H-2.2  Etching  for  Macro-Examination  —  In  general  for  aluminium 
and  brass,  the  above  finish  will  be  smooth  enough  for  a  satisfactory  etch 
to  be  obtained  for  macro-examination.  Suitable  etching  solutions  are  pre- 
pared by  mixing  the  following: 

a)  For  Aluminium 

1)  Caustic  soda  solution — 10  percent  {wjv). 

2)  Dilute  hydrochloric  acid  —  1:9  (by  volume ). 

3)  Dilute  nitric  acid  — 1:4  (by  volume). 

b)  For  Brass 

1)  Dilute  nitric  acid  —  1:3  (by  volume ). 

2)  Ammonium  persulphate  solution — 10  percent  solution  contain- 
ing about  20  percent  of  ammonia. 

H-3.  PROCEDURE  FOR  ETCHING 

H-3.1  The  etching  is  carried  out  either  by  swabbing  the  surface  with 
cotton  wool  or  by  immersing  the  specimen  in  the  etching  solution  until  a 
good  definition  of  the  structure  is  obtained.  The  specimen  should  then 
be  washed  in  water,  preferably  hot,  followed  by  rinsing  with  acetone  or 
alcohol  ( industrial  spirit )  and  dried  in  a  current  of  air.  If  specimens  are 
to  be  preserved,  a  coating  of  thin  oil  or  colourless  lacquer  is  of  advantage. 


76 


18:1393-1961 

APPENDIX    J 

( Clause  0.9 ) 

EQUIVALENT  fps  VALUES  OF 
METRIC  VALUES  USED  IN  THE  STANDARD 

Metkic  Units  Nearest  fps  Equivalents 

mm  *"• 


1-5  -^ 
1-60/ 


1 

3sr 


1 

Tff 


2 

2-50 

3 

3-15 

i 

4 

^% 

5 

T% 

6 

i 

10 

1 

12 

i 

25 

1 

40 

n 

SO 

2 

60 

2| 

75 

3 

150 

6 

225 

9 

300 

r 

12 

cm 

in. 

25x3 

lOxli 

90x60x 

30 

36x24x12 

25 

10 

kg 

lb 

30 

70 

45 

100 

metric 

tonnes 

tons 

8 

8 

77 


t^lD»A^  STANDARDS  tr43TITUTIO^ 

Mandk  eiidvdn,  9.  Brthfldur  Shah  2isfaf  Marg.  NEW  DELHI  T10CX>i 


WusCuin  .  NuvelLv  Channt?er-5.  Cjfanr  n<?e<l 

tuslft^n        5  ChQwinghflB  Approsc+l 

SouTh&rn  .  C.i.l  Campus- 
Morilvi:^r-fi       |tft9,  PSiasc^  VIS 

F 

Bfapcft  O/fk'^s  . 

■p'^ishnflfc.  wufmonamed  Shflrkh  Marg,  M>anpur 
T"  BIc-ck   Unity  Bld^.  NJrUChpmh&r^^a  Square 
fifljlonlrt  rnmnifin.  WMadbriBrjs  "Poscs.  T  T.  Nagar 
22^  K^lpafla  Area 

Sa-SeCL.N  Gupl?*M3^y 

H  14  yuc1hfyl,tfr  Mu\t^.  C  ^ichcmt; 
1 1  7/41  fi  B  Sar^odjya  NiS^^r 

Hirmtoj^  BFdg  (2nd  I^Sqot^,  Ply  ^t^tton  Road 


T5^ep^TO^>p 
eOMQAV  400007  5^65  20 

C ALC  U  T 1 A  700072  Z  7  50  30? 

MAE^RAS  e001T3  41  24  42-- 

S.A.S.  WAGAP  9  76  26 

iMOHAU)  teoost 


AMMA[>ABAD  3B0001  2  03  Sti 

BANGALORE  S^OOO:^  22  A&Om 

ESMO  PAL  462003  ^17  ir 

GHU6ANESHWAR  751  Ot4      5  36  27 

mDEH ABAt>  S00001  12  1 0  03^. 

JAIPUr^  302005  e  9&  3^1 

KflNPIiH  :?[}«[ JTJh  4  /i?  S^i 

PATNA0OO013  6  20  of 

TRIVANDflUM  695001  3:2  27:1 


PrrriLed  u!  OtfSflL  PiiiilFngCenTt-*,  Wij^Oplhi,  Intfiff 


i 


iiv^^ri( 


