**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  13573-1  (2011) :  Cable  Accessories  for  Extruded  Power 
Cables,  Part  1:  for  Working  Voltages  for  1.1  kV  upto  and 
Including  3.3kV(E)  -  Test  Methods  and  Test  Requirements 
;eTD  9:  Power  Cables] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  f  7ui^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  13573  (Parti):  2011 

*rrn  1    1.1  f^.cn.  ^  3.3  f^.cn.  (f)  ?tci>  c|5^  ^f^  ciWvji  — q^arur 

(  WcTT  ^^mr ) 

Indian  Standard 

CABLE  ACCESSORIES  FOR  EXTRUDED 
POWER  CABLES  —  SPECIFICATION 

PART  1  FOR  WORKING  VOLTAGES  FROM  1.1  kV  UP  TO  AND 
INCLUDING  3.3  kV(E)  —  TEST  METHODS  AND  TEST  REQUIREMENTS 

( First  Revision  ) 


ICS  29.060.20  ;  29.120.99 


©  BIS  2011 
BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH   ZAFAR   MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 


December  2011  Price  Group  9 


Power  Cables  Sectional  Committee,  ETD  09 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Part  1)  (First  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  the  Power  Cables  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Electrotechnical  Division  Council. 

There  was  no  Indian  Standard  for  cable  accessories  for  cable  with  rated  voltage  less  than  3.3  kV  (E).  This 
standard  details  the  performance  requirements  and  the  test  methods  for  type  tests  for  cable  accessories  for  use 
on  cables  of  rated  voltage  from  1.1  kV  to  3.3  kV(E). 

There  are  different  methods  followed  for  joints  and  terminations  and  the  basic  technique  depends  on  the  voltage 
rating  of  the  power  cable  for  which  the  accessories  needs  to  be  installed. 

This  standard  was  originally  published  as  IS  13573  :  1992  'Joints  and  terminations  of  polymeric  cables  for 
working  voltages  from  6.6  kV  up  to  and  including  33  kV  —  Performance  requirements  and  type  tests'.  This 
revision  has  been  undertaken  to  bring  it  in  line  with  International  practices.  It  has  been  split  up  into  three  parts. 
The  other  parts  in  the  series  are: 

Part  2    For  working  voltages  from  3.3  kV(UE)  up  to  and  including  33  kV(E)  —  Test  requirements 

Part  3    For  working  voltages  from  3.3  kV(UE)  up  to  and  including  33  kV(E)  —  Test  methods 

In  the  formulation  of  this  standard  assistance  has  been  derived  from  the  British  Standard  BS  EN  50393  :  2006 
'Test  methods  and  requirements  for  accessories  for  use  on  distribution  cables  of  rated  voltage  0.6/1.0  (1.2)  kV. 

This  standard  does  not  cover  performance  requirements  of  cable  accessories  for  paper  insulated  power  cables 
and  transition  joints. 

The  joints  and  terminations  of  power  cables  are  normally  made  at  site.  For  practical  reasons,  this  standard  is 
confined  to  type  tests  only.  For  tests  at  site,  reference  may  be  made  to  IS  1255  :  1983  'Code  of  practice  for 
installation  and  maintenance  of  power  cables  up  to  and  including  33  kV  rating  (third  revisionY . 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  {revisedy  .Tht  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the 
rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


Indian  Standard 

CABLE  ACCESSORIES  FOR  EXTRUDED 
POWER  CABLES  —  SPECIFICATION 

PART  1  FOR  WORKING  VOLTAGES  FROM  1,1  kV  UP  TO  AND 
INCLUDING  3-3  kV(E)  —  TEST  METHODS  AND  TEST  REQUIREMENTS 


(  First  Revision ) 


1  SCOPE 


This  standard  (Part  1)  details  the  performance 
requirements  and  the  test  methods  for  type  tests  for 
cable  accessories  for  use  on  cables  of  rated  voltage 
from  1.1  kV  to  3.3  kV(E).  Once  the  accessories  have 
been  successfully  type  tested,  then  these  tests  need 
not  be  repeated  unless  changes  are  made  in  the  cable 
accessory  materials,  design  or  manufacturing 
process  which  might  affect  the  performance 
characteristics. 

Joints,  indoor  and  outdoor  terminations  for  extruded 
solid  dielectric  insulated  cables  are  included. 

The  service  operating  conditions  of  accessories  shall 
be  compatible  with  the  service  operating  conditions 
of  the  cable. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions,  which 
through  reference  in  this  text  constitute  provisions  of 
this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  editions 
indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to 
revision  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 
standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility 
of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standard 
indicated  below: 


IS  No. 

1554  (Part  1)  : 
1988 

2071  (Part  1)  : 

1993/ 

lEC  60-1  1989 
7098  (Part  1) : 

1988 


8130:  1984 
8308  :  1993 


Title 

PVC  insulated  (heavy  duty)  electric 
cables:  Part  1  For  working  voltages 
up  to  and  including  1  100  V 
High  voltage  test  techniques: 
Part  1  General  definitions  and  test 
requirements 

Specification  for  cross  linked 
polyethylene  insulated  PVC 
sheathed  cable:  Part  1  For  working 
voltages  up  to  and  including  1  100  V 
Conductors  for  insulated  electric 
cables  and  flexible  cords 
Compression  type  tubular  in-line 
connectors  for  aluminium 
conductors  of  insulated  cables 


IS  No. 
8309  :  1993 


Title 


8337  :  1976 


9968  (Part  1)  : 
1988 

14255  :  1995 


Compression  type  tubular  terminal 
ends  for  aluminium  conductors  of 
insulated  cables 

Performance  requirements  of 
compression  joints  of  aluminium 
conductors  in  insulated  cables 
Elastomer  insulated  cables:  Part  1 
For  working  voltages  up  to  and 
including  1  lOOV 
Aerial  bunched  cables  for  working 
voltages  up  to  and  including  1  100 
volts  —  Specification 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  terms 
and  definitions  shall  apply. 

3.1  Joint  —  Accessory  suitable  for  use  in  air  or 
underground  which  makes  a  connection  between  two  or 
more  insulated  power  cables  to  form  a  continuous  circuit. 

3.1.1  Type  I  Joint  —  Joint  where  impact  withstand, 
impulse  voltage  withstand  and  metallic  screen  short 
circuit  current  withstand  tests  are  not  required. 

3.1.2  Type  IlJoint  —  Joint  tested  for  impact  withstand 
but  not  for  impulse  voltage  withstand  or  metallic  screen 
short-circuit  current  withstand. 

3.1.4  Type  IllJoint  —  Joint  tested  for  impulse  voltage 
withstand  and  metallic  screen  short-circuit  current 
withstand  but  not  for  impact  withstand. 

3.2  Rigid  Joint 

a)  Joint  which  incorporates  a  resin  encapsulant 
capable  of  being  poured  or  injected  at  ambient 
temperature  and  which  cures  to  a  solid  state 
by  an  irreversible  chemical  reaction  without 
the  application  of  external  heat. 

or 

b)  Joint  which  incorporates  a  non-setting 
encapsulant  within  a  rigid  housing. 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


3.3  Non-rigid  Joint  —  Joint  which  incorporates 
polymeric  tapes,  heat  or  cold-shrinkable  components 
or  pre-moulded  parts  without  a  rigid  housing. 

3.4  Type  of  Joints 

a)  Straight  joint  —  Accessory  making  a 
connection  between  two  cables  of  similar 
insulation  to  form  a  continuous  circuit. 

b)  Transition  joint  —  Accessory  making  a 
connection  between  cables  having  extruded 
solid  dielectric  insulation  and  impregnated 
paper  insulation. 

3.5  Stop  End  —  Accessory  providing  a  means  of 
insulating  an  energized  cable  end. 

3.5.1  Type  I  Stop  End  —  Stop  end  tested  for  impact 
withstand  but  not  for  impulse  voltage  withstand. 

3.5.2  Type  II  Stop  End  —  Stop  end  tested  for  impulse 
voltage  withstand  but  not  for  impact  withstand. 

3.6  Cable  Crutch  —  Position  at  which  the  laid  up  cores 
of  a  multi  core  cable  separate  into  individual  cores. 

3.7  Outdoor  Termination  —  Termination  intended 
for  use  where  it  is  directly  exposed  to  either  solar 
radiation  or  weathering  or  both. 

3.7.1  Type  I  Termination  —  Termination  where  impulse 
voltage  withstand  is  not  required. 

3.7.2  Type  II  Termination  —  Termination  tested  for 
impulse  voltage  withstand. 

3.8  Type  Tests  —  Tests  required  before  supplying  a 
type  of  cable  accessory  covered  by  this  Indian 
Standard,  on  a  general  commercial  basis,  in  order  to 
demonstrate  satisfactory  performance  characteristics 
to  meet  the  intended  application.  These  tests  are  of  such 
a  nature  that,  after  they  have  been  successfully  made, 
they  need  not  be  repeated  unless  changes  are  made  in 
the  cable  accessory  materials,  design  or  type  of 
manufacturing  process  which  might  change  the 
performance  characteristics. 

4  COMPONENTS 

4.1  Connectors 

Connectors  used  within  the  accessory  shall  comply 
with  IS  8308,  IS  8309  where  applicable,  or  with  another 
relevant  Indian  Standard. 

4.1.1  Connectors  (lugs  and  ferrules)  used  should  be 
in  line  with  IS  8337. 

4.2  Materials 

Component  material  characterization  is  not  a  pre- 
requirement  for  compliance  with  this  standard. 


5  ELECTRICAL  CHARACTERISTICS 

5.1  Rated  Voltage 

The  rated  voltage  of  the  joints,  stop  ends  and  outdoor 
terminations  shall  be  UJU  (UJ  =  0.635/1.1(1.2)  kV 
and  1.9/3.3  (3.6)  kV  where, 

a)  U^  rated  power  frequency  voltage  between 
phase  conductor  and  earth  or  metallic  screen 
for  which  the  cable  accessory  is  designed; 

b)  U  rated  power  frequency  voltage  between 
phase  conductors  for  which  the  cable 
accessory  is  designed;  and 

c)  U^  the  maximum  value  of  the  'highest  system 
voltage'  between  phase  conductors  for  which 
the  cable  accessory  may  be  used. 

5.2  Current  Rating 

The  continuous  current  rating  of  a  joint  or  outdoor 
termination  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  relevant 
standard  as  applicable  shall  be  suitable  for  operation 
at  the  temperatures  given  in  Table  1  for  continuous 
duty  and  under  short-circuit  conditions. 

Table  1  Maximum  Rated  Conductor 
Temperatures 


SI 

Rating 

(2) 

Insulation  Type 

No. 

(1) 

Extruded  Solid 
Dielectric  XLPE  /EPR 

(3) 

PVC^ 

(4) 

i) 
ii) 

Continuous 
Short-circuit 

90  °C 

250  °C 

70  °C 
160°C 

6  REQUIREMENTS 

Joints,  stop  ends  and  outdoor  terminations  complying 
with  this  standard  shall  meet  the  following 
requirements. 

6.1  General 

The  range  of  compliance  shall  include  the  cable 
conductor  cross-sections  tested,  together  with  the 
intermediate  cross-sections. 

Any  successful  test  sequence  carried  out  on  only  one 
cable  cross-section  shall  give  compliance  for  that  cross- 
section  only. 

Compliance  with  this  standard  for  an  accessory  for  a 
particular  type  of  cable  insulation  extends  to  other  types 
of  insulation  according  to  Table  2. 

Compliance  obtained  for  a  cable  with  one  type  of 
sheathing  material  shall  not  be  extended  to  an  other- 
wise identical  cable  incorporating  a  different  sheathing 
material. 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


Table  2  Summary  of  Compliance  with  Different 
Cable  Insulations 

(Clause  6.1) 


SI  No. 

(1) 


Cable  Insulation 

(2) 


Range  of  Approval 

(3) 


i) 

XLPE 

XLPE,  EPR,  HEPR,  PVC 

ii) 

EPR,  HEPR 

EPR,  HEPR,  PVC 

iii) 

PVC 

PVC 

NOTE  —  It  should  be  noted  that  adhesion  between  the  cable 
insulation  and  the  accessory  filling  compound  is  critical  for 
the  performance  of  some  joint  designs. 

Compliance  obtained  by  testing  on  a  non  water-blocked 
type  of  cable  shall  be  extended  to  a  water-blocked  cable 
that  is  otherwise  of  the  same  design.  The  converse  shall 
not  apply. 

Joints  and  stop  ends  shall  normally  be  designed  and 
tested  to  withstand  a  height  of  water  of  1  000  mm 
[10kPa(0.1  bar)]. 

For  special  applications  and  in  situations  subject  to  a 
high  water  table  or  prone  to  flooding,  this  height  of 
water  may  be  insufficient  to  ensure  the  satisfactory 
performance  of  the  moisture  seals.  In  such  cases,  upon 
agreement  between  manufacturer  and  the  user,  the 
accessories  shall  be  tested  using  an  increased  water 
height  of  10  000  mm  [100  kPa  (1.0  bar)].  The  chosen 
water  height  shall  be  recorded  in  the  test  report. 

Testing  at  one  water  height  will  achieve  compliance 
for  that  pressure  only.  Testing  at  both  1  000  mm  and 
10  000  mm  water  heights  will  achieve  compliance 
for  those  water  heights  and  all  intermediate  pressures. 

Compliance  will  be  gained  for  a  range  of  accessories 
of  the  same  design  and  materials  for  a  given  cable 
type  and  for  a  range  of  conductor  cross-sections 
(copper  and  aluminium),  providing  the  appropriate 
samples  have  successfully  undergone  the  appropriate 
test  sequence  in  Tables  3,  4  or  5. 

6.2  Joints  and  Stop  Ends 

Compliance  for  branch  joints  for  a  given  range  of  cable 
cross-sections  may  be  extended  to  straight  joints  and 
stop  ends  for  the  same  range  of  cable  cross-sections, 
if  it  can  be  shown  that  the  construction  is  similar  and 
the  seals  are  of  the  same  type  and  not  inferior  to  those 
of  the  branch  joints  tested. 

6.3  Transition  Joints 

To  be  tested  under  agreement  between  the  purchaser 
and  the  supplier. 

6.4  Packaging,  Marking  and  Labelling,  and 
Information  Provided  by  Manufacturer 

6.4.1  Packaging 

Packaging  shall  be  adequate  to  ensure  that  any  stated 


shelf  life  is  maintained  when  the  accessory  is  stored 
under  covered,  dry  conditions  within  the  stated  ambient 
air  temperatures,  such  that  the  performance  of  the 
components  forming  part  of  the  total  accessory  is 
unaffected. 

6.4.2  Marking  and  Labelling 

Individual  accessory  kits  on  the  outside  of  the 
packaging  shall  contain  the  following  information  and 
all  the  kits  are  to  be  suitably  labelled  for  identification 
purpose  with  the  following  details: 

a)  Manufacturer's  name  or  logo  and  the  name 
of  components  wherever  feasible; 

b)  Type  of  jointing  materials,  the  application; 

c)  Batch  number(s),  where  relevant; 

d)  Product  reference; 

e)  Defined  storage  conditions  and  expiry  date, 
if  any; 

f)  If  relevant,  the  manufacturing  date; 

g)  Health  and  safety  marking  and  handling 
instructions,  where  relevant;  and 

h)     Reference  to  compliance  with  this  standard. 

Inside  the  packaging, 

a)  list  of  contents; 

b)  installation  instructions,  including  drawings 
or  other  information  specific  to  the  accessory. 

Where  practicable,  joint  shells  or  outer  coverings  shall 
be  permanently  and  legibly  marked  with  a  reference  that 
will  enable  the  range  of  cables  for  which  the  joint  is 
suitable  to  be  identified  from  the  manufacturer's  literature. 

If  conductor  connectors  are  included  they  shall  be 
permanently  and  legibly  marked/embossed  with  the 
conductor  type  and  cross-section,  or  a  reference 
number  that  will  enable  this  information  to  be  obtained 
from  the  manufacturer's  literature. 

6.4.3  Health  and  Safety 

The  manufacturer  shall  make  available  such 
information  as  will  enable  the  purchaser  to  use  and 
dispose  of  any  materials  in  a  safe  manner  in  accordance 
with  relevant  legislation. 

7  TYPE  TESTS 

7.1  General 

Written  reports  on  type  tests  proving  compliance  with 
this  standard  shall  be  made  available  by  the 
manufacturer.  The  principal  details  of  the  test 
arrangements  shall  be  given  in  the  test  report,  including, 
for  example,  cross-sections  of  conductors,  model  and 
type  of  connector,  minimum  clearance  between  joint 
and  shell,  wherever  applicable,  as  shown  in  the 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


manufacturers  drawing.  The  test  reports  shall  be  signed 
by  a  representative  of  the  body  carrying  out  the  tests. 
This  may  be  the  manufacturer  or  a  recognized 
certification  body. 

Should  a  cable  fail  beyond  any  part  of  an  accessory, 
the  test  shall  be  declared  void  without  discrediting  the 
accessory.  Tests  may  be  repeated  using  a  new  accessory 
(reverting  to  the  beginning  of  the  test  sequence)  or 
alternatively  by  repair  of  the  cable  (continuing  testing 
from  the  point  of  suspension). 

7.2  Sequence  of  Tests 

The  test  sequence  shall  be  in  the  order  given  in  Tables  3 
to  5,  as  appropriate  for  the  accessory  being  tested. 

7.3  Test  Samples 

The  number  of  samples  required  for  each  test  sequence 
shall  be  in  accordance  with  Tables  6  to  9. 

Cables  used  for  testing  shall  comply  with  IS  1554 
(Part  1),  IS  7098  (Part  1),  IS  9968  (Part  1)  and  IS  14255 
(No  tests  on  messenger  conductor)  and  shall  be 
identified  in  the  test  report  with  respect  to, 


a) 
b) 

c) 


d) 


rated  voltage; 

material,    shape    and   cross-section    of 

conductors; 

details  of  construction  (insulation  and  sheath, 

number  of  cores,  armour,  inner  sheath,  outer 

sheath,  water-blocking,  etc);  and 

principal  cable  dimensions. 


The  connecting  components  used  in  a  joint  or 
termination  shall  comply  with  4.1. 

Accessories  to  be  tested  shall  be  correctly  identified  in 
accordance  with  6.4.2. 

Accessories  shall  be  assembled  in  the  manner  specified 
in  the  manufacturer's  instructions,  using  the 
components  supplied  in  the  kit. 

Accessories  shall  be  dry  and  clean,  but  neither  the  cable 
nor  the  accessories  shall  be  subjected  to  any  form  of 
conditioning  which  may  modify  the  electrical,  thermal 
or  mechanical  performance  of  the  test  assemblies. 

Relevant  details  regarding  the  test  installation  shall 
be  recorded  in  the  test  report  for  future  reference  and 
to  ensure  repeatability  of  the  test  regime. 


Table  3  Test  Sequence  for  Joints  for  Solid  Extruded  Dielectric  Insulated  Cables 

(Clauses  6.1  and  7.2) 


SI 
No. 


(1) 


Test 


(2) 


Samples 
Type  of  Joints^^ 


II 


III 


Al/Bl     Al/Bl    Al/Bl    A2/B2 
(3)  (4)  (5)  (6) 


Requirements 


(7) 


i) 


Impulse  voltage  withstand  at  ambient  temperature 

(see  8.2) 

Heating  cycle  in  air  (see  8.3) 

Heating  cycle  in  water  (oversheath  damage)  (see  8.3) 

Insulation  resistance  (immersed)  (see  8.4) 

Insulation  resistance  (in  air)  (see  8.4) 

Insulation  resistance  (immersed)  (see  8.4) 
vii)    Impact  at  ambient  temperature  (see  8.5) 
viii)   ac  voltage  withstand  (immersed)  (see  8.6) 
ix)    ac  voltage  withstand  (in  air)  (see  8.6) 
x)     ac  voltage  withstand  (immersed)  (see  8.6) 
xi)    Examination  ^^  (see  8.8) 
xii)    Screen  short-circuit  "^^  (see  8.9) 


ii) 
iii) 
iv) 

V) 

vi) 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

—  —  —  X 


No  failure 


Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 
Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 
Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 

No  failure 

No  failure 

No  failure 

For  information  only  ^^ 

The  fuse  shall  operate  before  an 

open   circuit   develops   between 

the  test  pin  and  the  screen. 


^^  For  the  definitions  of  Types  I,  II  and  III,  see  3.1.1  to  3.1.3,  and  for  the  explanation  of  Al/Bl,  A2/B2  see  Tables  6  and  7. 
^^  For  cast  resin  joints  visual  examination  only  is  required.  No  cracks  are  allowed,  but  when  a  joint  contains  solid  cured  resin 

damage  to  the  mould    may  be  ignored. 
^^  The  accessory  shall  be  examined  and  the  following  information  reported  in  the  test  report: 

a)  cracking  of  filling  media  and/or  tape  or  tubing  components; 

b)  a  moisture  path  across  a  primary  seal; 

c)  corrosion  which  would,  in  time,  lead  to  failure  of  the  joint; 

d)  leakage  of  any  insulating  material. 

"^^  This  test  is  required  for  joints  incorporating  an  overall  metallic  screen  only  and  is  subject  to  agreement. 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


SI 

No. 


(1) 


Table  4  Test  Sequence  for  Stop  Ends  on  Solid  Extruded  Dielectric  Insulated  Cables 

(Clauses  6.1  and  7.2) 

Test 


(2) 


i)  Impulse  voltage  withstand  at  ambient  temperature  (see  8.2) 

ii)  Insulation  resistance  (immersed)  (see  8.4) 

iii)  Insulation  resistance  (in  air)  (see  8.4) 

iv)  Impact  at  ambient  temperature  (see  8.5) 

v)  ac  voltage  withstand  (in  air)  (see  8.6) 

vi)  ac  voltage  (immersed)  (see  8.6) 

vii)  ac  voltage  withstand  (immersed)  (see  8.6) 

viii)  Immersion  (see  8.7) 

ix)  Examination  ^^  (see  8.8) 

^^  For  the  definitions  of  Types  I  and  II,  see  3.5.1  to  3.5.2,  and  for  the  explanation  of  CI  see  Table  8. 

^^  For  cast  resin  stop-end  visual  examination  only  is  required.  No  cracks  are  allowed,  but  when  a  stop-end  contains  solid  cured 

resin  damage. 
^^  The  accessory  shall  be  examined  and  the  following  information  reported  in  the  test  report: 

a)  cracking  of  filling  media  and/or  tape  or  tubing  components; 

b)  a  moisture  path  across  a  primary  seal;  and 

c)  corrosion  which  would,  in  time,  lead  to  failure  of  the  stop-end. 
"^^  Leakage  of  any  insulating  material  to  the  housing  may  be  ignored. 


Samples 

Requirements 

Type  of  Stop  End  1^ 

I 

II    ^ 

CI 

CI 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 



X 

No  failure 

X 

X 

Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 

X 

X 

Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 

X 

— 

X 

X 

No  failure 

X 

X 

No  failure 

X 

X 

No  failure 

X 

X 

X 

X 

For  information  only  ^^ 

Table  5  Test  Sequence  for  Outdoor  Terminations  on  Solid  Extruded  Dielectric  Insulated  Cables 

(Clauses  6.1  and  7.2) 


SI 

No. 


(1) 


Test 


(2) 


i)  Impulse  voltage  withstand  at  ambient  temperature  (see  8.2) 

ii)  Heating  cycle  (in  air)  (see  8.3) 

iii)  Heating  cycle  (Crutch  immersed)  (see  8.3) 

iv)  Insulation  resistance  (in  air)  (see  8.4) 

v)  Insulation  resistance  (crutch  immersed)  (see  8.4) 

vi)  ac  voltage  withstand  (in  air)  (see  8.6) 

vii)  ac  voltage  withstand  (Crutch  immersed)  (see  8.6) 

viii)  Examination  ^^  (see  8.8) 

^^  For  the  definitions  of  Types  I  and  II,  see  3.7.1  to  3.7.2,  and  for  the  explanation  of  Dl  see  Table  9. 
^^  The  accessory  shall  be  examined  and  the  following  information  reported  in  the  test  report: 

a)  cracking  of  filling  media  and/or  tape  or  tubing  components; 

b)  a  moisture  path  across  a  primary  seal; 

c)  corrosion  which  would,  in  time,  lead  to  failure  of  the  termination;  and 

d)  leakage  of  any  insulating  material. 


Samples 

Requirements 

Type  of  Termination  ^^ 

I                              II 

Dl 

Dl 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 



X 

No  failure  nor  flashover 

X 

X 

— 

X 

X 

— 

X 

X 

Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 

X 

X 

Insulation  resistance  >  50  MQ 

X 

X 

No  failure 

X 

X 

No  failure 

X 

X 

For  information  only  ^^ 

8  TEST  METHODS 

8.1  General 

8.1.1  Test  Conditions 

Tests  shall  be  made  at  an  ambient  temperature  within 
the  range  20  ±  15°C,  unless  otherwise  stated  in  the 
details  of  a  particular  test. 

Tap  water  shall  be  used  for  all  tests  in  water. 

The  frequency  and  waveform  of  power  frequency  test 
voltages  shall  be  in  accordance  with  IS  2071  (Part  1). 


The  test  shall  be  started  not  less  than  24  h  after  the 
installation  of  the  accessories  on  the  cable  test  loops, 
unless  otherwise  specified  by  the  manufacturer. 

Cable  screen  and  armour,  if  any,  shall  be  bonded 
and  earthed  at  one  end  only  to  prevent  circulating 
currents. 

8.1.2  Temperature  Calibration  of  Cable 

8.1.2.1  Application 

All  cables  heated  in  the  test  sequences. 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


Table  6  Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section:  Straight  Joints 

(Clause  13\  and  Table  3) 


SI    Sequence 
No. 

(1)  (2) 


Tests 

(3) 


Symbol 

(4) 


Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section^^ 


(5) 


i)      Al 


General  test  sequence 


2  samples: 

a)  One  sample  with  smallest  conductor  cross-section 

b)  One  sample  with  largest  conductor  cross -section 


ii)      A2 


Screen  short-circuit 


Two  samples  with  conductor  cross-section  >  150  mm^ 


^^  Copper  or  aluminium. 


Table  7  Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section:  Branch  Joints 

{Clause  13\  and  Table  3) 


SI    Sequence 
No. 

(1)  (2) 


Tests 

(3) 


Symbol 

(4) 


Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section^^ 


(5) 


i)       Bl 


General  test  sequence 


2  samples: 

a)  One  sample  with  smallest  main  conductor  cross-section 
and  with  smallest  branch  conductor  cross-section 

b)  One  sample  with  largest  main  conductor  cross-section 
and  with  smallest  branch  conductor  cross-section 


ii)        B2  Screen  short-circuit 


^^  Copper  or  aluminium. 


Two  samples  with  conductor  cross-section  >  150  mm^ 


Table  8  Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section:  Stop  Ends 

{Clause  13\  and  Table  4) 


SI    Sequence 
No. 

Tests 

(1)         (2) 

(3) 

Symbol 

(4) 


Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section^^ 

(5) 


i)      CI 


General  test  sequence 


^^  Copper  or  aluminium. 


2  samples: 

a)  One  sample  with  smallest  conductor  cross-section 

b)  One  sample  with  largest  conductor  cross-section 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


Table  9  Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section:  Outdoor  Terminations 

(Clause  13\  and  Table  5) 


SI    Sequence 

IVrk 

Tests 

(1)          (2) 

(3) 

Symbol 

(4) 


Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section^^ 


(5) 


Dl 


General  test  sequence 


2  samples: 

a)  One  sample  with  smallest  conductor  cross-section 

b)  One  sample  with  largest  conductor  cross-section 


^^  Copper  or  aluminium. 


Or 


SI    Sequence 

Tests 

(1)         (2) 

(3) 

Symbol 

(4) 


Number  of  Test  Samples  and  Conductor  Cross-section^^ 


(5) 


Dl 


General  test  sequence 


2  samples: 

a)  One  sample  with  smallest  conductor  cross-section 

b)  One  sample  with  largest  conductor  cross-section 


^^  Copper  or  aluminium. 


8.1.2.2  Purpose 

The  purpose  is  to  enable  the  measurement  of  conductor 
temperature  during  the  heating  cycle  test  given  in  8.3 
by  monitoring  the  temperature  of  the  sheath  when  a 
control  cable  is  not  used  for  the  test. 

8.1.2.3  Test  procedure 

Temperature  calibration  of  cable  shall  be  carried  out 
before  the  test  sequence  by  application  of  the  Method 
1  or  2  given  in  Annex  A,  or  by  any  equivalent  method. 

8.2  Impulse  Voltage  Withstand  Test  at  Ambient 
Temperature 

8.2.1  Purpose 

This  test  is  used  as  a  screening  test  required  to  check, 
before  running  the  full  test  sequence,  that  the 
accessory  meets  the  network  impulse  requirements. 

8.2.2  Test  Installation 

The  accessory  shall  be  installed  on  a  test  loop  in 
accordance  with  the  manufacturer's  installation 
instructions. 


8.2.3  Test  Procedure 

The  test  shall  be  conducted  at  ambient  temperature 
as  defined  in  8.1.1. 

Impulses  shall  be  applied  to  each  phase  in  turn  with 
the  other  phases,  neutral  and  screen  earthed. 

A  series  of  10  positive  and  10  negative  impulses  shall 
be  applied  at  the  values  given  below: 

a)  8  kV  for  accessories  installed  on  a  main  cable 
with  a  conductor  cross-section  <  50  mm^. 

b)  20  kV  for  accessories  installed  on  a  main 
cable  with  a  conductor  cross-section  >  50 


NOTE  —  In  the  case  of  a  branch  joint,  the  conductor  cross- 
section  of  the  branch  cable  is  not  relevant. 

8.3  Heating  Cycle  Test 

8.3.1  Purpose 

The  heating  cycle  test  aims,  in  a  short  time,  to  simulate 
the  operating  stresses  experienced  by  accessories 
during  their  service  life,  through  the  thermo- 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


mechanical  effects  produced  during  the  alternating 
heating  and  cooling  phases. 

8.3.2  Test  Installation 

The  test  shall  be  carried  out  on  the  accessories  being 
subjected  to  the  main  test  sequence.  The  conductor 
temperature  should  be  determined  according  to  one  of 
the  three  methods  given  in  Annex  A. 

For  Methods  1  and  2,  the  arrangements  are  shown  in 
Fig.  2,  3  and  4  and  the  electrical  connections  for 
various  accessories  are  shown  in  Fig.  5  to  8. 

The  conductor  temperature  shall  be  monitored  by 
measuring  the  temperature  of  the  sheath  of  the  external 
cable  by  a  thermocouple  attached  to  the  sheath 
1  000  mm  (minimum)  outside  the  accessory  for  tests 
in  air  or  500  mm  (minimum)  above  the  water  level 
for  tests  in  water  and  500  mm  (minimum)  from  the 
external  crutch,  as  shown  in  Fig.  2  and  3.  The 
conductor  temperature  shall  be  established  from  the 
relationship  derived  in  the  test  given  in  8.1.2.  If  the 
ambient  temperature  varies  by  more  than  10°C  from 
the  temperature  at  which  the  calibration  test  given  in 

8.1.2  was  carried  out,  a  further  calibration  shall  be 
made. 

8.3.3  Test  Procedure 

The  total  cycle  shall  be  completed  within  8  h.  A  typical 
heating  and  cooling  cycle  is  shown  in  Fig.  9. 

Joints  shall  be  subjected  to  63  cycles  in  air  followed 
by  63  cycles  immersed  in  water.  Branch  cables 
<  50  mm^  shall  not  be  heated. 

Outdoor  terminations  shall  be  subjected  to  63  cycles 
in  air  followed  by  63  cycles  with  the  crutch  only 
immersed.  For  convenience,  the  'in  air'  cycles  may  be 
carried  out  in  the  tank  (without  water),  but  provision 
shall  be  made  to  allow  air  circulation. 

NOTE  —  Care  should  be  exercised  if  cable  incorporates 
magnetic  armouring. 

8.3.3.1  In  air 

The  temperature  of  the  main  conductors  (and  branch 
conductors  when  >  50  mm^)  shall  be  raised  to  between 
5  and  10°C  above  the  maximum  rated  temperature  by 
heating  the  assembly,  by  passing  current  through  the 
cables,  as  shown  in  Fig.  5  to  8,  as  appropriate.  A  steady 
conductor  temperature  shall  be  maintained  for  not  less 
than  2  h.  After  the  2  h  minimum  steady  temperature 
period  the  current  shall  be  switched  off  and  the  cable 
allowed  to  cool  naturally  to  within  10°C  of  ambient 
within  a  period  not  less  than  3  h.  Forced  cooling  shall 
not  be  used. 

8.3.3.2  In  water 

Joints'.  The  core(s)  of  one  polymeric  insulated  cable 


shall  be  exposed  at  the  entry  to  the  joint  by  removing 
an  annulus  of  the  oversheath  together  with  any 
bedding  or  filling  material  of  at  least  50  mm  length  at 
a  point  which  will  be  within  the  water  and  between  50 
mm  and  150  mm  from  the  exterior  of  the  accessory. 
The  exposure  of  the  core(s)  shall  be  made  on  the  side 
with  the  shorter  sealing  length  between  the  sheath  cut 
back  and  connectors.  The  assembly  shall  be  placed  in 
a  water  bath  (or  pressure  vessel)  with  a  water  height 
of  /z  =  1  OOOto^  mm  or  other  wise  specified  above  the 
main  cable  entry  {see  6.1). 

The  over  sheath  damage  requirement  does  not  apply 
to  water-blocked  cable  designs. 

Outdoor  terminations'.  The  thermocouple  shall  be 
placed  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  water  height  over  the 
crutch  shall  be  /z  =  300  ±100  mm. 

During  the  heating  cycle  the  temperature  of  the  water 
shall  be  20  ±  15°C. 

Conductor  temperatures  shall  be  recorded  during  each 
of  the  126  cycles.  Any  cycle  during  which  the  specified 
minimum  conductor  temperature  is  not  reached  shall 
be  rejected  and  additional  cycles  carried  out  to  achieve 
the  specified  number. 

8.4  Insulation  Resistance  Test 

8.4.1  Purpose 

To  ensure  that  the  insulation  resistance  has  not  been 
impaired  by  the  mechanical  and  electrical  tests. 

8.4.2  Test  Installation 

Assemblies  subjected  to  the  test  sequences. 

8.4.3  Test  Procedure 

Insulation  resistance  shall  be  measured  using  an 
instrument  with  an  operating  voltage  in  the  range 
100  V  to  1  000  V  dc. 

The  dc  test  voltage  shall  be  applied  for  sufficient  time 
to  reach  a  steady  measurement,  but  for  not  less  than 
1  min  and  not  more  than  5  min.  Insulation  resistance 
measurements  shall  be  made  at  ambient  temperature. 

8.4.3.1  Prior  to  immersion  in  water 

The  insulation  resistance  shall  be  measured  between 
each  phase  conductor  in  turn  and  the  other  phase 
conductors,  and  between  the  bunched  phase  cores  and 
all  other  metallic  parts. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  part  of  the  test  the  neutral  shall 
be  treated  as  another  phase  core. 

8.4.3.2  After  immersion  in  water 

The  insulation  resistance  shall  be  measured  between 
each  phase  conductor  in  turn  and  the  other  phase 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


conductors,  and  between  the  bunched  phase  conductors 
and  all  other  metallic  parts  and  water. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  part  of  the  test  the  neutral  shall 
be  treated  as  another  phase  conductor  providing  the 
sheath  damage  in  the  load  cycling  test  has  not  brought 
it  in  contact  with  the  water  (that  is  in  the  case  of  cables 
with  a  concentric  neutral).  If  the  neutral  is  in  contact 
with  the  water  it  shall  be  bunched  with  the  other 
metallic  parts. 

8.5  Impact  at  Ambient  Temperature 

Following  two  categories  of  joints  or  stop  ends  are 
considered: 

a)  Rigid  joints  and  stop  ends;  and 

b)  Non-rigid  joints  and  stop  ends,  incorporating 
a  metallic  earth  screen. 

8.5.1  Purpose 

The  purpose  of  this  test  is  to  demonstrate  the 


mechanical  strength  of  the  joint  or  stop  end  at  ambient 
temperature. 

8.5.2  Test  Installation 

The  test  shall  be  performed  on  all  joints  or  stop  ends 
to  be  subjected  to  the  main  test  regime.  The  number  of 
impacts  shall  be  as  specified  below. 

8.5.3  Test  Procedure 

8.5.3.1  Rigid  joints  and  stop  ends 

The  accessory  shall  be  placed  in  a  box  on  a  hard 
surface,  for  example  a  concrete  slab  or  floor,  and  the 
box  shall  be  filled  with  sand  to  the  horizontal  centre  of 
the  accessory  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 

The  impacting  tool  shall  be  a  wedge-shaped  steel  block 
of  4  kg  mass  having  a  90°  angle  with  a  2  mm  radius 
impacting  edge  of  minimum  width  50  mm.  The  block 
shall  be  dropped  onto  the  accessory  from  a  height  of 
1 000^^  mm,  so  that  the  impacting  edge  is  horizontal. 


Detail  of 

impacting 

edge 


Guide  rails  to  ensure 
correct  orientation 
at  point  of  impact 


Joint 


c 
iS 

C 


Sand  support  to  joint 

centre  line 
(omitted  for  non  rigid) 


50  min. 


xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxyxxxxxx>g 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  1  Arrangement  for  the  Impact  Test  at  Ambient  Temperature 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  accessory,  and  centered 
on  the  point  of  impact. 

The  impact  shall  be  made  at  the  mid-point  of  the 
primary  moisture  seal  at  each  cable  entry,  and  in  the 
middle  of  the  joint  near  to  the  connector(s). 

The  accessory  shall  be  immersed  in  water  with  a 
height  of  1 000^^  mm  above  the  cable  entry  or  such 
other  height  as  specified,  for  a  minimum  of  3  h  before 
carrying  out  the  a.c.  voltage  and  insulation  resistance 
tests.  The  time  of  immersion  may  be  extended  over 
one  night  for  convenience. 

8.5.3.2  Non-rigid  joints  and  stop  ends 

The  accessory  shall  be  placed  on  a  hard  surface,  for 
example  a  concrete  slab  or  floor. 

The  impacting  tool  shall  be  a  wedge-shaped  steel 
block  of  4  kg  minimum  having  a  90°  angle  with  a  2 
mm  radius  impacting  edge  of  minimum  width  50  mm. 
The  block  shall  be  dropped  onto  the  accessory  from  a 
height  of  1 000-0^  mm  so  that  the  impacting  edge  is 
horizontal,  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  accessory, 
and  centered  on  the  point  of  impact. 

The  impact  shall  be  made  at  each  cable  entry  within 
10  mm  of  the  edge  of  the  over  sheath  on  the  joint  side. 
In  addition  one  impact  shall  be  made  over  the 
connector(s). 

As  far  as  practicable  the  accessory,  at  the  point  of 
impact,  shall  be  in  contact  with  the  floor. 


The  accessory  shall  be  immersed  in  water  with  a 
height  of  1 000-0^  mm  above  the  cable  entry  or  such 
other  height  as  specified,  for  a  minimum  of  3  h  before 
carrying  out  the  ac  voltage  and  insulation  resistance 
tests.  The  time  of  immersion  may  be  extended  over 
one  night  for  convenience. 

8.6  ac  Voltage  Withstand  Test 

8.6.1  Purpose 

The  purpose  of  the  test  is  to  assess  the  integrity  of  the 
insulation  early  in  the  test  sequence  and  to  identify 
deterioration  of  the  insulation  as  a  result  of  the 
mechanical  and  thermal  stresses  introduced  during  the 
tests. 

8.6.2  Test  Installation 

Joints  and  stop  ends:  The  test  shall  be  carried  out 
while  immersed  in  the  water  bath  (or  pressure  vessel), 
or  in  air  as  specified  in  Tables  3  and  4.  For  immersion 
depth  see  Fig.  3. 

Outdoor  terminations'.  The  test  shall  be  carried  out  in 
air  or  with  the  crutch  immersed  in  water  as  specified 
in  Table  5.  For  immersion  depth  see  Fig.  4. 

8.6.3  Test  Procedure 

An  ac  voltage  of  4  kV  shall  be  applied  for  1  min 
between  the  bunched  phase  conductors  and  all  other 
metallic  parts  and  the  water  (if  appropriate). 

An  ac  voltage  of  4  kV  shall  be  applied  for  1  min 


500 
min 


Thermocouple 


Thermocouple 


500 
min 


1000 
min 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
NOTE  —  For  convenience,  this  part  of  test  may  be  conducted  in  the  tank  (without  water). 

Fig.  2  Typical  Arrangement  for  the  Heating  Cycle  in  Air 


10 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


between  each  phase  conductor  in  turn  and  all  other 
phase  conductors,  metallic  parts  and  water  earthed. 

In  situations  where  the  neutral  is  insulated  from  the 
water,  the  neutral  shall  be  treated  as  another  phase 
conductors  for  the  purposes  of  this  test. 

8.7  Immersion  Test 

8.7.1  Purpose 

The  purpose  of  the  test  is  to  prove  the  satisfactory 
moisture  ingress  performance  of  the  stop  ends. 

8.7.2  Test  Installation 

The  cores  of  the  cable  shall  be  exposed  by  removing 
an  annulus  of  the  oversheath  and  any  bedding  or  filling 
material  over  a  length  of  at  least  50  mm,  starting  at  a 
point  50  mm  from  the  cable  entry. 

The  oversheath  damage  requirement  does  not  apply 
to  water-blocked  cable  designs. 

The  test  sample  shall  be  immersed  in  a  water  bath  (or 
pressure  vessel)  with  a  height  of  1  000  mm,  or  as 
otherwise  specified,  above  the  cable  entry  of  the  stop 
end  (see  6.1).  The  sample  shall  remain  immersed  for 
21  days  and  during  this  time  the  temperature  of  the 
water  shall  remain  in  the  range  20  ±  15°C. 

After  21  days  the  sample  shall  undergo  the  ac  voltage 
withstand  test  specified  in  8.6  followed  by  insulation 


resistance  measurement  in  accordance  with  8.4  while 
still  immersed  in  the  water  bath. 

8.8  Examination 

8.8.1  Purpose 

The  purpose  of  the  examination  is  to  ascertain  whether 
any  deterioration  has  taken  place  in  the  accessory 
which  may  affect  its  long  term  service  life. 

8.8.2  Examination  Objects 

The  joints  and  outdoor  terminations  which  have  been 
subjected  to  the  heating  cycle  test  and  stop  ends  which 
have  been  subjected  to  the  immersion  test  shall  be 
sectioned  and  examined. 

8.8.3  Procedure 

8.8.3.1  Rigid  joints  and  stop  ends 

Dismantle  the  assemblies  and  examine  the  joint. 

Section  the  joint  at  right  angles  to  the  cable  axis  at 
the  position  of  the  phase  conductor  connector(s)  and 
at  the  ends  of  the  oversheath  (polymeric  insulated 
cables)  or  the  metallic  sheath  (paper  insulated  cables). 
Make  two  cuts  at  each  position  to  give  a  cross-section 
of  the  joint  approximately  25  mm  thick. 

Visually  examine  the  encapsulant  exposed  at  the 
sectioned  ends  of  the  joint  for  cracks  and  large  voids 
and  if  any  are  present,  record  details. 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

NOTES 

1  h  =  height  of  water,  as  specified  in  6.1  and  8.6.3. 

2  If  pressure  vessel  is  used  it  shall  incorporate  of  registering  pressure  and  water  level. 

Fig.  3  Typical  Arrangement  for  the  Heating  Cycle  for  Joints  in  Water 


11 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
NOTE  —  h  =  height  of  water  (see  also  8.3.3). 

Fig.  4  Typical  Arrangement  for  the  Heating  Cycle  for  Outdoor  Terminations  in  Water 


12 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


Examine  the  cross-section  of  each  joint  cable  entry  for 
water  ingress  between  the  encapsulant  and  the  cable 
sheath.  Make  two  cuts  approximately  45°  apart  around 
the  circumference  down  to  the  cable  sheath.  If  possible, 
pull  the  45°  segment  of  encapsulant  away  from  the 
cable  sheath  and  scrutinize  the  interface  surfaces  that 
are  consequently  exposed  for  moisture. 

Examine  the  metalwork  and  in  particular  any  neutral 
conductor  or  earth  bonds  for  corrosion  and  record  the 
results  of  the  examination. 


NOTE  —  Where  practicable  the  sectioning  should  be  carried 
out  using  hand  tools  rather  than  power  tools,  to  avoid 
evaporating  any  moisture. 

8.8.3.2  Non-rigid  joints  and  stop  ends 

Examine  the  joint  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  moisture 
seals  and  corrosion  of  the  armour  bonds  and  other 
metalwork  exposed  within  the  joint  casing. 

Check  the  outer  sleeve  or  protection  for  any  splits 
and  then  remove  it  where  it  overlaps  the  cable  over 
sheath. 


Main  cable 

{Neutral 
Phases 


{U 


Current 
Transformer 


Branch  cables  unloaded 


Outline  of  the 
•      branch  joint 


Fig.  5  Method  of  Connection  for  the  Heating  Cycle  Test  on  Branch  Joint  Where  the  Main  Cable 
Conductor  Cross-Section  is  Greater  Than  50  mm^  and  the  Branch  Cable  Conductor  Cross-Section  is 

Less  Than  or  Equal  to  50  mm^  (Example  Only) 


13 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


If  the  outer  sleeve  or  protection  comprises  more  than 
one  component  (for  example,  two  sleeves  over 
lapped),  similarly  examine  the  seal(s)  between  the 
components. 

Remove  the  joint  case  (sleeve  plus  any  metallic  casing) 
to  allow  examination  of  the  jointed  conductors  and 
any  metal  work,  for  example  armour  bonds. 

Remove  the  primary  insulation  over  each  conductor 
connector  (using  heat,  if  necessary)  and  examine  the 
seals. 

Examine  the  metalwork,  and  in  particular  any  neutral 
conductor  or  earth  bonds  for  corrosion  and  record  the 
results  of  the  examination. 


NOTE  —  Since  the  design  of  the  joint  may  allow  moisture  to 
enter  the  joint  from  the  cable,  it  is  essential  that  the  primary 
insulation  seals  are  shown  to  be  effective  in  preventing  moisture 
reaching  the  conductor  connectors. 

8.8.3.3  Outdoor  terminations 

The  termination  shall  be  dismantled  and  all 
components  shall  be  examined  for  traces  of  moisture 
within  water-proofing  components.  The  results  of  the 
examination  shall  be  recorded. 

8.9  Metallic  Screen  Short-Circuit  Current 
Withstand  Test 

8.9.1  Purpose 

To  check  that  when  the  joint  is  pierced  by  a  metallic 


{ 


Main  cable 
Neutral 


Phases  /  2( 


-^3 


Current 
Transformer 


Outline  of  the  straight  joint 


y 


Fig.  6  Method  of  Connection  of  Three  Phase  Cables  for  the  Heating  Cycle  Test  on  a  Straight  Joint 

(Example  Only) 


14 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


hand  tool  the  circuit  protection  operates  before 
disintegration  of  the  screen.  It  is  apphcable  to  straight 
and  branch  joints  only  where  the  conductor  cross-section 
is  150  mm^  and  above,  on  networks  protected  by  fuses. 
The  size  of  fuse  to  be  used  in  the  test  shall  be  subject  to 
agreement  between  the  customer  and  the  manufacturer. 


8.9.2  Test  Installation 

The  general  arrangement  of  the  test  joint,  including 
resistance  and  fuse,  is  shown  in  Fig.  10. 

Two  joints  shall  be  made  which  shall  be  additional  to 
those  subjected  to  the  main  test  regime. 


Main  cable 

Neutral 

Phases 


} 


Outline  of  the  branch  joint. 


Fig.  7  Method  of  Connection  of  Three  Phase  Main  and  Branch  Cables  of  Equal  Conductor 
Cross-Section  for  Heating  Cycle  Test  on  a  Branch  Joint  (Example  Only) 


15 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


During  the  making  of  each  joint,  a  length  of  insulated 
copper  braid  or  conductor  of  a  minimum  cross- 
sectional  area  of  50  mm^  shall  be  connected  to  one 
phase  and  brought  out  of  the  joint  to  be  connected  to 
a  8  mm  diameter  copper  test  pin. 

A  hole  of  maximum  diameter  6  mm  shall  be  drilled 
into  the  joint  so  that  the  test  pin  may  be  inserted  to 
make  connection  with  the  screen. 


8.9.3  Test  Procedure 

The  current  source  shall  be  set  up  to  deliver  a  phase 
to  earth  short-circuit  current,  /g^,  the  value  to  be  agreed 
between  the  customer  and  the  manufacturer.  The  open 
circuit  voltage  between  the  test  phase  and  earth  shall 
be  230  V. 

The  short-circuit  current  and  the  voltage  shall  remain 
in  phase  throughout  the  test. 


Main  cable 


Current 
Transformer 


Fig.  8  Method  of  Connection  of  Three  Phase  Main  and  Branch  Cables  of  Unequal  Conductor 
Cross-Section  for  Heating  Cycle  Test  on  a  Branch  Joint  (Example  Only) 


16 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


Specified 
temperature 


Ambient 


Cooling  period 


Fig.  9  Typical  Heating  Cycle 


Copper  test  pin 


Insulated  copper  braid  or 
conductor 


Neutral 


Screen 
Fig.  10  Arrangement  for  the  Screen  Short-Circuit  Test 


17 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


ANNEX A 
{Clauses  8.1.2.3  and  8.3.2) 

DETERMINATION  OF  THE  CABLE  CONDUCTOR  TEMPERATURE 


A-1  PURPOSE 

For  some  of  the  accessory  tests,  it  is  necessary  to  raise 
the  cable  conductor  to  a  given  temperature,  typically  5 
to  10°C  above  the  maximum  temperature  in  normal 
operation,  while  the  cable  is  energized,  either  at  power 
frequency  or  under  impulse  conditions.  It  is  therefore 
not  possible  to  have  access  to  the  conductor  to  enable 
direct  measurement  of  temperature. 

In  addition,  the  conductor  temperature  should  be 
maintained  within  a  restricted  range  (5°C),  whereas 
the  ambient  temperature  may  vary  over  a  wider  range. 

Thus,  it  is  necessary  to  carry  out  a  preliminary 
calibration  on  the  test  cable  to  determine  the  actual 
conductor  temperature  during  the  accessory  tests, 
allowing  for  the  permitted  variation  in  ambient 
temperature. 

Guidance  is  given  hereafter  on  commonly  used 
methods. 

A-2  CALIBRATION  OF  THE  TEST  CABLE 
CONDUCTOR  TEMPERATURE 

The  purpose  of  the  calibration  is  to  determine  the 
conductor  temperature  by  direct  measurement  for  a 
given  current,  within  the  temperature  range  required 
for  the  test. 

The  cable  used  for  calibration  should  be  identical  to 
that  to  be  used  for  the  accessory  test. 


A-2.1  Installation  of  Cable  and  Thermocouples 

The  calibration  should  be  performed  on  a  minimum 
cable  length  of  2  m,  the  thermocouples  being  installed 
at  0.5  m  from  the  cable  ends,  as  shown  in  Fig.  11. 

At  each  place,  two  thermocouples  should  be  attached: 
one  on  the  conductor  {a),  and  one  on  the  external 
surface  (/?),  as  shown  in  Fig.  12. 

It  is  recommended  that  the  thermocouples  are  attached 
to  the  conductor  by  mechanical  means  since  they  may 
move  due  to  vibrations  of  the  cable  conductor  during 
heating. 

If  the  actual  test  loop  includes  several  individual  cable 
lengths  installed  close  to  each  other,  these  lengths  will 
be  subjected  to  thermal  proximity  effect.  The 
calibration  should  therefore  be  carried  out  taking 
account  of  the  actual  test  arrangement,  measurements 
being  performed  on  the  hottest  cable  length  (usually 
the  middle  length). 

NOTE  —  The  thermocouples  {b)  on  the  external  surface  are 
only  necessary,  if  method  A-3.2  is  used. 

A-2.2  Method 

The  calibration  should  be  carried  out  in  a  draught  free 
situation  at  a  temperature  between  5°C  and  35 °C. 

Temperature  recorders  should  be  used  to  measure  the 
conductor,  sheath  and  ambient  temperatures. 


Detail  see  Fig.  12 


Thermocouple       \ 


Cable  length  loop  :  2m  min 


Fig.  1 1  Reference  Cable 
18 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


The  cable  should  be  heated  until  the  conductor 
temperatures  a^  and  a2,  indicated  by  thermocouples  (a) 
at  positions  1  and  2  of  Fig.  11,  have  stabilized  and 
reached  the  temperatures  between  5°C  and  10  °C  above 
the  maximum  conductor  temperature  of  the  cable  in 
normal  operation,  as  given  in  the  relevant  standard  for 
extruded  insulation  cables. 

It  is  considered  that  stabilization  has  been  reached,  if 
the  conductor  temperatures,  a^  and  a2,  do  not  show 
any  variation  larger  than  2°C  within  a  2  h  period. 

When  stabilization  has  been  reached,  the  following 
should  be  noted: 

a)  Conductor  temperature,  0^^^^^  =  (^^i  +  (^2)^2 

b)  Sheath  temperature,  0,heath.c  =  (^1  +  ^iV^ 

c)  Ambient  temperature,  6^^^^,^ 

d)  Heating  current,  4^1 

A-3  HEATING  FOR  ACCESSORY  TEST 

Let 

7?2o  =  resistance  per  unit  length  of  conductor  at 
20°C(^^^IS8130); 

a2o  =  temperature  coefficient  of  resistance  at  20°C 
(^^^18  8130); 

T  =  thermal  resistance  between  the  conductor 
and  the  surrounding  medium  (including  T^, 
the  thermal  resistance  of  air);  and 


T  =  thermal  resistance  between  the  conductor 
and  the  external  surface  of  the  cable 
(excluding  T^,  the  thermal  resistance  of  air). 


NOTE  —  T  =  Tj  +  nT2  +  nT^  where  /i  =  1  for  single 
core  cables;  /i  =  3  for  three  core  cables  and  T=T'  +  nT. 


=  ambient  temperature  during  accessory 
test; 

^  =  temperature  of  external  surface  during 
accessory  test;  and 

Aest        -  current  during  accessory  test. 


A-3.1  Method  1:  Test  Based  on  Measurement  of 
Ambient  Temperature 

Assuming  that  dielectric,  metallic  sheath  and  armour 
losses  are  negligible. 


a)     During  cable  calibration: 


O  —  ft 

^cond  amb.c ' 


J?       * 


b)     During  accessory  test: 


'^cond       '^amb.t ' 


J?       * 


/2,,ji  +  a2o(e,,,d-20)]r 


.(1) 


...(2) 


(It  is  assumed  that  T,  and  particularly  T^  has  not 
changed). 

Combining  (1)  and  (2)  gives: 

Aest  -  ^cal  ^J~  \y  ^cond  "  ^amb.tV(  ^cond  "  ^amb.c)  J     " -0) 


llayer  copper  tape 
+  2  half  lapped 
layers  adhesive  tape 


(a)  and  (b)  =  1  mm 
thermocouples 


Fig.  12  Arrangement  of  the  Thermocouples 


19 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


A-3.2  Method  2:  Test  Based  on  Measurement  of  the 
External  Surface  Temperature 


a)     During  cable  calibration: 


ft       —  fl 

cond  sheath.c " 


^20 


^cai[i  +  «2o(eco„d-20)]r 

b)     During  accessory  test: 

^cond  ~  ^sheath.t  ~  ^20 

^.eJi  +  «2o(eco„d-20)]r 

Combining  (4)  and  (5)  gives: 


^test       ^cal   V      n  '^cond       '^sheath, 


t)/(  e. 


e. 


c)} 


■  -.(4) 


■  (5) 


.(6) 


It  should  be  noted  that  equation  (4)  allows  the 
determination  of  the  internal  thermal  resistance  T'  of 
the  cable  from  readings  of  temperature  and  current. 

Equation  (5)  can  be  written  in  the  form: 

"cond  —  ["sheath.t  +  (1  ~  20Ct2o)  ^20  '  test 

n  /[I-  0^0^20  ^testn  -(7) 


It  is  therefore  possible  to  transpose  this  formula  in  the 
form  of  chart,  as  shown  in  Fig.  13,  giving  6^^^^^  from 
^sheath.t  readings,  for  various  values  of  the  heating 
current  I,,H,/t..t9  


The  use  of  such  a  chart  is  advisable,  if  the  test  is  not 
automatically  controlled. 

A-3.3  Method  3:  Test  Using  a  Control  Cable 

In  this  method,  a  control  cable  identical  to  the  cable 
used  for  the  test  is  heated  with  the  same  current  as  the 
test  loop.  The  cable  is  not  energized  and  therefore 
thermocouples  can  be  fitted  to  the  conductor  as 
recommended  in  A-2.1. 

The  test  arrangement  should  be  such  that, 

a)  the  control  cable  should  carry  the  same  current 
as  the  test  loop  at  any  time,  and 

b)  it  should  be  installed  in  such  a  way  that  mutual 
heating  effects  are  taken  into  account 
throughout  the  test. 


c 
o 
u 

<s> 


test  4 


0  sheath. t 


Fig.  13  Current/Temperatures  Curves 


20 


IS  13573  (Part  1)  :  2011 


The  thermocouples  should  be  mounted  on  the  external 
surface  of  the  test  loop  at  the  positions  given  in  Fig.  1 1 , 
in  the  same  way  as  the  thermocouples  are  mounted  on 
or  under  the  surface  of  the  control  cable. 

The  temperature  measured  with  the  thermocouple  fitted 
to  the  conductor  of  the  control  loop  may  be  considered 
as  representative  for  the  conductor  temperature  of  the 
energized  test  loop. 

All  thermocouples  should  be  connected  to  a  temperature 
recorder  to  enable  temperature  monitoring.  The  heating 


current  of  each  test  loop  should  be  recorded  to  prove 
that  the  two  currents  are  of  the  same  value  throughout 
the  duration  of  the  test.  The  difference  between  the 
heating  currents  should  be  kept  within  ±1  percent. 

The  heating  current  is  adjusted  so  that  the  conductor 
temperature  is  kept  within  the  specified  limits. 

NOTE  —  The  temperature  measured  with  the  thermocouples 
on  the  oversheath  of  the  energized  test  loop  and  of  the  control 
cable,  are  used  to  check  whether  the  oversheath  of  both  test 
loops  has  the  same  temperature. 


21 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  No.:  ETD  09  (5976). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 

Telephones  :  2323  0131,  2323  3375,  2323  9402  Website:  www.bis.org.in 

Regional  Offices:  Telephones 

Central       :   Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  /  2323  7617 

NEW  DELHI  1 10002  \  2323  3841 

Eastern       :    1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  R  Road,  Kankurgachi  /  2337  8499,  2337  8561 

KOLKATA  700054  \  2337  8626,  2337  9120 


Northern    :    SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  160  3843 

60  9285 


{; 


Southern     :   C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600113  f  2254  1216,  2254  1442 

L  2254  2519,  2254  2315 

Western      :   Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  J  2832  9295,  2832  7858 

MUMBAI  400093  \  2832  7891,  2832  7892 

Branches:  AHMED ABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOR\L.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR.  PARWANOO.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM.  

Published  by  BIS,  New  Delhi 


