**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10667 (1983) : Guide for selection for industrial safety 
equipment for protection of foot and leg [CHD 8: 
Occupational Safety, Health and Chemical Hazards] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS ( 10*67.1883 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 

SELECTION OF INDUSTRIAL SAFETY 

EQUIPMENT FOR PROTECTION OF 

FOOT AND LEG 



UDC 658'382'3 + 08:6I4'897 




© Copyright i984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN.9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 1 IUU02 

Ot 2 February 1984 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 

SELECTION OF INDUSTRIAL SAFETY 

EQUIPMENT FOR PROTECTION OF 

FOOT AND LEG 

Industrial Safety Advisory Committee, ISAC 
Chairman Representing 

Dr S. S. Ramaswamy Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 

Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ), 
Bombay 

Members 

Shri P. R. Surendranathan ( Alternate to 
Dr$. S. Ramaswamy ) 
Shri V. K. Arora Ministry of Shipping and Transport 

. Shri T. P. P. Nambiar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Prem Baveja Hindustan Aeronautic Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri B. S. Grover ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Bhatia Indian Cotton Mills' Federation, Bombay 

Shri Charanjit Lal Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur 

SHRr B. R. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Chakravarty Indian National Trade Union Congress, New 

Delhi 

Shri Karan Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Chaudhuri Indian Society of Engineers, Calcutta 

Dr D. K. Nag ( Alternate ) 
Shri n. Chawla Sandoz ( India > Ltd, Thane 

Shri S. C. Dey Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Shri S. M. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Director ( Commercial ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Commercial ) ( Alternate ) 
Director General of Mines Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Safety 

Director, Mines Safety 
Equipment ( Alternate ) 
Shri Durgesh Chandra Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Shri Jayant Adhia ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. N. Ghosh Institution of Fire Engineers India, New Delhi 

Shri K. C. Gupta National Safety Council, Bombay 

Shr[ N. Raghavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. P. Jha Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10667 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri J. D. Jijina In Jian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri M. N. Arora ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Kant Safety Appliances Manufacturers* Association, 

Bombay 
Shri Kirit Maru ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. N. Kholktjte Factory Inspectorate, Government of Maharashtra., 

Bombay 

Shri H. N. Mirashi ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. KrishnanN air The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travanco'e Ltd, 

Udyogmandal 
Shri B. S. Mathur Standing Committee on Safety for the Steel 

Industry, Durgapur 
Shri A. K. Dasgupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. B. Menc n Standing Fire Advisory Council, Ministry of Home 

Affairs, New Delhi 
Shri M. K.Modwel Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shri R. N. Mukhopadhyay Directorate General of Health Services, New 

Delhi 
Shri S. Purushothama Loss Prevention Association of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri T. V. Madhumani ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Ramamurthy Ministry of Communications 

Shri Y. V. R. Reddy ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Ranade Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, 

Calcutta 

Shri S. R. C. Rao Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri R. N. Das ( Alternate ) 
Representative Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri Y. K. Sapru The Safety First Association of India, Bombay 

Shri A. A. Jasdenvaea ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Sarkhel The Project & Development ( India ) Ltd, Sindri 

Shri I. C. Sarin Employees State Insurance Corporation, New 

Delhi 
Dr K. M. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Seshadri Ministry of Petroleum & Chemicals 

Shri Jagjit Singh ( Alternate ) 
DrB. SjNGH Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), 

Dhanbad 
Shri P R. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Sirkar Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. J. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Venkaswamy Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri S. P. Vidyarathi AH India Manufacturers' Organization, Bombay 

Shri S. K. Mathur, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Director ( Chem ) 



Secretary 

Shri K. K. Tripathi 

Senior Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 

( Continued on page 8 ) 



IS : 10667 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 

SELECTION OF INDUSTRIAL SAFETY 

EQUIPMENT FOR PROTECTION OF 

FOOT AND LEG 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 September 1983, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Safety 
Advisory Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 

0.2 Foot injuries are caused due to: (a) Striking against stationary object, 
(b) Striking by moving object; (c) Stepping on hot objects, (d) Stepping 
on sharp objects, (e) Heat radiation and welding sparks, and (f) chemicals. 

To protect the foot from hazards (a) to (f) above, leather safety boot 
should be used; for hazard (e) asbestos, safety boots should be used. 

0.3 Main differences between the safety boot and the ordinary shoe are as 
follows: 

Safety Boot Ordinary Shoe 

a) Provided with a carbon steel Not provided with steel toe cap 

toe cap 

b) Ankle height is 115 mm No ankle height 

c) Sole hardness is above 55 Sole hardness is less than 55 IRHD 

IRHD 

0.4 For foot protection it is also necessary for the employer to provide 
washrooms, showers, and locker facilities so that employees can con- 
veniently bathe their feet and change into clean, dry footwear after the 
day's work. 

0.5 In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
the following publications: 

Di^rks M. Baldevin. A foot hold on safety. Job Safety Health, May 

1976. 
Conservation of Personal Protective Equipment, Safety Practices 

Pamphlet No. 106- National Safety Council, Chicago. 
Protective Clothing, Safety Practice Pamphlet No, \& National Safety 
CoyncjL Chicago, 



IS : 10667 - 1983 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides guidance for selection, use and maintenance of 
safety boots, shoes and leg guards. 

2. TYPES 

2.0 The protective footwear should suit the job, that is, their construction 
and materials should provide adequate defence against all hazards the 
workers may encounter. 

2-1 Safety shoes have the widest application in industry. The metal cap 
built into the shoe is meant to shield the toes from impact and compression. 
When there is a heavy lift-truck traffic in a plant, or other added risk of 
injury to the toe/foot metatarsal guards offer additional protection. 

2.2 Safety boots and rubber shoes offtr protection against wet, cold or 
slippery conditions such as in outdoor work, refineries and food processing 
plants. If worn over safety shoes, overboots do not need any reinforcement 
in the toe area. If worn over bare feet shoes, overboots should have built- 
in toe caps. 

2.3 Conductive shoes and over-shoes, worn round explosive gases or 
material, permit the static electricity that builds up in the body of the 
wearer to drain off harmlessly into a conductive, grounded floor. Employee 
should not be allowed to wear them outdoors because any accumulation 
of dirt impairs effectiveness of conductive shoes. Electrical resistance of 
the shoes should be tested periodically while they are in service. 

2.4 Non-sparking shoes are used in hazardous locations such as in 
explosive operations or in the cleaning of tanks that have held gasoline or 
volatile hydrocarbons. 

2.5 Shoes for protection from electrical hazards should not have any 
exposed metal; the toe box should be insulated from the shoe. Electrical 
hazard shoes can be depended on for protection when they are dry and in 
good condition; however, protection is diminished when they are wet from 
perspiration or rain. 

2.6 Foundry safety boots for moulders and welders are used whenever 
there is a hazard from hot splashes, such as, in the pouring of molten 
metals, or flying sparks. They fit snugly and should be as easy as possible 
to remove in case a spark or hot metal gets inside. Instead of being closed 
by laces, they should have other suitable fasteners to hold the top of the 
shoe close to the ankle. 



IS : 10667 - 1983 

2#7 Leather Safety Boots and Shoes — In safety shoes the sole and steel toe 
are of prime importance. The sole leather used in safety shoes/boots shall 
conform to IS : 579 ( Part 1 )-1973*. 

2.8 Asbestos Safety Shoes — They should have a flame treated leather lining 
as well as the sole. For heat as well as flame protection it is necessary that 
asbestos used in the production of such shoes is of suitable grade. 
Asbestos having close weave will reduce penetration of heat from outside 
to the inside. The laces of such shoes should be of leather of borax 
tieated cotton laces. Plastic laces should never be used in this variety of 
shoes. 

2.8.1 Sole — It is advisable that between the layers of sole glass 
wool is inserted for protection against heat. 

2.9 PVC and Rubber Gumboots — There are two varieties in rubber 
gumboots that is general purposes and industrial. Only industrial gumboots 
should be employed for use when the hazard is handling stronger or mild 
acids, alkalies and corrosive chemicals. PVC half gumboots made from 
pure vinyl is also ideal for protection against acids and alkalies. Use of 
PVC apron along with PVC half gumboots is recommended for obtaining 
required frontal body protection. 

3. LEG PROTECTION 

3.1 Footguards that are added outside the shoe can provide significant 
protection where there are hazards from moving objects. Combination foot 
and shin guards can be used where there is danger from flving particles 
such as jack hammer work. Strap on wooden soled sandals can be used 
for protection against under foot hazards of heat, oil, acids, hot water, 
caustics and sharp objects. 

3.2 Leg protection is also secured by various types of leggings, from waist 
length to those that reach only part way to the knees. The length and 
material to be used depend upon the hazards involved. 

3.3 For protection against molten metal, leggings should be instantly 
removable in an emergency. They should also have large flares to protect 
the instep and heel and be free from projecting buckles and clamps. 

3.4 Asbestos and leather are used where it is necessary to protect against 
molten metal, sparks and heat. Fire resisting duckmand wool may be used 
against light spatters and sparks. Leggings are known as 'spring* type 
because no fasteners are used to afford easy removal. These may be 
furnished with an inner fibre shield as protection against leg bruises and 
affording effective shedding of molten material. Others of metal construc- 
tion are also used where the sole hazard is injurious to the shin through 
bumps and bruises. 

♦Specification for sole leather: Part 1 Vegetable unne4 sole leather {second 
revision ). 



IS : 10667 - 1983 

3.5 Where acids, alkalies and hot water are encountered, natural or 
synthetic rubber or any other synthetic material may be used, depending 
upon the hazard encountered. 

3.6 Spats of leather, fire resisting duck, wool or asbestos are used by men 
whose ankles and shoe top may be exposed to molten metal or sparks. 
Welders find this equipment useful particularly in close work. Man so 
equipped should wear their trouser legs over the spats unless the latter 
are closely bound to prevent sparks or hot metal from entering at the top 
of the spat. 

3.7 Knee pads of asbestos, fibre, felt or reinforced leather are used as 
protection against heat and sharp edges encountered in steel mills, glass 
plant operations, sheet metal plants, mines and similar industries. Knee 
pads of rubber construction are also furnished to workers who are required 
to remain on their knees for extended periods of time, such as cement 
finishers, etc. 

3.8 Leg Guard — Leather leg guard of 225 mm size should be used by 
welders to protect the leg from welding sparks and to avoid entering of 
sparks inside the safety boots. Leg guard of 400 mm size should be used by 
workers engaged in loading the curled chips in the machine shop. 

4. SELECTION, FITTING AND INSPECTION 

4.1 Supervisors and employees should be advised to select the proper type 
of safety shoe for each job. Recommend the proper type shoe. For 
example, workers on wet slip floors may need non-slip sole shoes which 
will not be harmed by water or acid. For more severe exposures of this 
type, provide over-shoes, boots, wooden sole shoes or wooden or rubber 
mat sandals. 

4.2 Select synthetic rubber or chrome leather soles for work on oily 
ground or floors because ordinary rubber or leather deteriorates under 
such exposure. 

4.3 For excessively heated or sharp material on the floor, use sandal safety 
shoes or wooden sole shoes. 

4.4 Furnish external toe or foot guards when there is need for additional 
protection because of heavy material handled or because of severe 
exposure to abrasion and sharp metal which otherwise would cut the 
leather uppers. 

4.5 All employees buying shoes should understand the need for proper 
fitting. The workers feet will spread, especially if heavy loads are carried; 
hence measurement of length and width should bs taken with the weight 
of the body on the feet. 



tS ; 10667 - 1983 

4.6 Shoes that do not fit tempt the wearer to mutilate them in an effort to 

secure comfort. 

5. CLEANING, DRESSING, STERILIZATION AND REPAIR 

5.1 Encourage employees to clean and dress their shoes frequently. 

5.2 Sterilize the shoes if required as per instructions of the manufacturer. 

5.3 Do not allow shoes to wear or deteriorate beyond a condition suitable 
for repair, whether the tepair is undertaken by the employee or employer. 

5.4 Replace worn soles before wearing down the inner soles. 

5.5 Replace run down heels before the weight of the wearer forces 
counters and other parts out of shape. 

5.6 Conductive sole shoes, designed to prevent the accumulation of body 
static charges, as well as antispark and shock resistant types require special 
attention. Only repairmen thoroughly familiar with their construction and 
trained in approved methods of repairs should attempt this work. The 
advice of the manufacturer should be sought. 

6. USE AND CARE 

6.1 It should be ensured that employee gets a comfortable shoe; a good 
fitting will not cramp or chafe the feet on the job and it will wear longer. 

6.2 Shoes should be kept in good repair. Worn out soles and run down 
heels are dangerous. 

6.3 Clean the shoes frequently. 

6.4 Keep shoes as dry as possible. If they get wet, dry them slowly. Wet 
leather will be damaged by heat greater than the hand can bear. 

6.5 Wash the feet and change socks daily. Perspiration harms the leather 
and causes the lining to wear out and become rough. 

6.6 Wear heavy cotton or woollen socks which absorb perspiration better 
and wear longer than thin nylon, silk or rayon socks. 

6.7 Avoid stepping on or kicking against sharp metal; scraper other 
material which may damage shoes or may cause foot injury. 



IS: 10661 - 1983 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Safety Equipment Subcommittee, ISAC S : 2 
Convener Representing 

Shri B. S. Mathur Steel Authority of India ( Durgapur Steel Plant ), 

Durgapur 

Members 

Shri J. J. Adhia Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Shri M. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Bardhan Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri J. P. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri k. N. Bhattacharjee central Coal Mines Rescue Stations Committee, 

Dhanbad 

Shri S. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. N. Bhattacharya The Safety First Association of India ( Bihar 

Branch ), Jarnshedpur 

Shri N. K. Saran ( Alternate ) 
Shri Charanjit Lal Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri B. R. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Chawla Sandoz ( India ) Ltd, Thane 

Shri S. Y. Phondge ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. K. Ghosh Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), 

Dhanbad 

Shri P. R. Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Guha Neogi Reyrolle]Burn Ltd, Howrah 

Shri P. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. C. Gupta National Safety Council, Bombay 

Shri A. N. Jndurkar Mines Safety Appliances Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri M. Mishra ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. P. Jain Mines Service Corporation, Asansol 

Shri A. P. Agarwala ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director of Mines Safety Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Shri S. S. Mazumdar Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. C. Karmarkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr O. P. Mittal Indian Chemical Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri N. C. Mukherjee National Safety Council, Bombay 

Shri N. Raghavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. Pereira Joseph Leslie & Co, Bombay 

Smt. C. Leslie Rey ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Puri National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shri S. G. Ranade Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. S. Salodkar Coal India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. D. Shroff Pradeep Safety Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. D. Shroff ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Sirkar Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd, Bareilly 

Shri P. R. Surendranathan Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 

Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour ). 
Bombay 

Shri M. K. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri Francis Leslte Vaz Francis Leslie & Co, Bombay 

Shri Heatcliff Vaz ( Alternate ) 



