**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10298 (1982) : Guidelines for design and construction of 
mould and core drying ovens for foundries [MTD 26: 
Industrical Fuel Fired Furnaces] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10298^ 1982 

(Reaffirmed 2000) 



Indian Standard 



GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN AND 

CONSTRUCTION OF MOULD AND CORE 

DRYING OVENS FOR FOUNDRIES 



UDC 62! '745-3 : 621 '743*56 : 66047 4(5 




® Copyright L932 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 WAllADUR SllAH ZAF\K MARG 

new delhi \mm 



Gt 5 



Dmmbit 1982 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN AND 

CONSTRUCTION OF MOULD AND CORE 

DRYING OVENS FOR FOUNDRIES 

Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, SMDG 32 

Chairman Representing 

Dr Ing. P. H. Bhangalk Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants ( India ) 

Ltd, Ranchi 

Members 
Shri G. D. Apte Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar 

Shri B. G. Phadke ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Balasubramaniam Thermal Equipments, Madras 

Shri K. N. Ghakbavorty Bharat Electric Steel Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Gangopadhyay Wesman Engineering Co Pvt, Ltd, Calcutta 

Shiu K. K. S ark Ait ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Goswami Guest, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah 

Shri B. N. Kalyani Bharat Forge Co Ltd, Pune 

Dr A. K. Kher ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. C. Kamdar Ful Furnaces Manufacturers, Vadodara 

Shri R. A. Pradhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. B, Kamdar National Agricultural & Diesel Industries, Madras 

Shri S. K. Madhok Utkal Machinery Limited, Kansbahal 

ShriA. StTBRAMANiAN ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. T. Makhuani Association of Indian Engineering Industry, Bombay 

Shri Y. P. Vatsa ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Mandal Engineering Projects ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. K. MukherJee ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. K. Basit ( Alternate II ) 
Shri R. C. Nandy M. N. Dastur & Co (P) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. De ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Narasimhan Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras 

Shri M. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. A. Patel Indian Furnace Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. H. Khandelwal ( Alternate I ) 

Shri M. Pukandhar ( Alternate II ) 
Shri G. Ramdass Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 

Shri I. C. Khanna ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. H. Rane Sahyadri Udyog, Pune 

Shri S. N. Phansalkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Rao Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr S. M. Aeron ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri B. G. Sengupta Tata Engineering & Locomotive Company Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Shri M. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Senior Chemist & Metallur- Ministry of Railways 
gist, Wheel & Axle Plant, 
Bangalore 
Chemist & Metallurgist 

( SF) CLW, Cottaranjan* ( Alternate I) 
Dy Director (Mst) RDSO, 
Luckucw ( Alternae II ) 
Shri P. L. Shrivastava Wellman Incandescent India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. Ghose ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. L. Son*eji Special Steels Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. P. Talreja ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. R. SriKivasan National Producitivity Council, New Delhi 

Shri E. F. Sitrti Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited, Jamshedpur 

Shri C. V. Deo ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri B. Mukherji 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN AND 
CONSTRUCTION OF MOULD AND CORE _ 
DRYING OVENS FOR FOUNDRIES 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 14 June 1982, after the draft finalized by the Industrial 
Fuel-Fired Furnace Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 In a foundry, an oven is used for drying and baking moulds 
and cores. Generally an oven is tailor-made for a specific end-use. 
However, in this standard an effort is made to stipulate the general 
guidelines affecting the various parameters connected with design, 
location and construction of an oven. 

0.3 This standard is set forth under classification of such units operating 
at approximately atmospheric pressure and a maximum temperature of 
500 C. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
' standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard gives guidelines for design and construction of mould 
and core drying ovens for use in foundries, with any of the following 
fuels: 

a) fuel oil, 

b) liquefied petroleum gases ( LPG ), 



* Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10298 - 1982 



c) LPG — air mixture, 

d) natural gas, and 

e) coke oven or producer gas. 

2. TYPES OF OVENS 

2.1 Ovens can be classified broadly in two categories: 

a) batch type, and 

b) continuous type. 

2.1.1 Batch type oven includes all ovens in which the work charge is 
introduced all at one time or intermittently. The evaporation of mois- 
ture within the oven is not at a constant rate. 

2.2 A detailed classification of ovens is shown in Fig. 1. 

3. OVEN HEATERS 

3.1 The oven heaters may be classified in two categories as follows: 

a) Indirect System — In this system, the burner along with the combus- 
tion chamber is effectively separated from the oven chamber and 
is so arranged that the products of combustion from the burner 
are mixed with the recirculated hot gases from the oven chamber 
in a mixing duct and fed back to the oven chamber in a closed 
circuit. Eighty percent of the spent gases from oven are recir- 
culated in the annulus of hot air generator and mixed with 
combustion product. Twenty percent of the spent gases are 
exhausted. Fresh air is either blown or induced ( see Fig. 2, 
schemes I and II ). 

b) Direct System — In this system, the combution chamber is wholly 
or partly inside the oven chamber. The burner system is 
separated from the oven chamber and is on the oven chamber 
casing. Hot gases from the oven chamber are recirculated inside 
the oven chamber ( see Fig. 2, Scheme III ). Fresh air is blown 
by a recirculation fan. 

3.1.1 The characteristics of different categories of oven heating systems 
are given below: 



Characteristic 



Fresh air 



Indirect System 
( Scheme I ) 

Induced 



Indirect System 
( Scheme II ) 

Blown by a 
blower 



Direct System 
( Scheme III ) 

Blown by recir- 
culation fan 



IS : 10298 - 1982 



Suction fan 

— Inlet From hot air 



— Outlet To oven inlet 
Exhaust fan 

4. LOCATION 



From oven outlet From oven out- 
let 

To hot air gene- To combustion 
rator chamber 

A separate fan is No separate fan No separate fan 

required required required 



4.1 Ovens shall be so located and erected that the structural members 
of the building are not adversely affected by the maximum anticipated 
temperatures. 

4.2 Ovens should be well separated from valuable stock, important 
power equipment, machinery and sprinkler risers, thereby securing a 
minimum interruption to production and protection in case of accidents 
to the oven. 

4.3 Ovens should be safely located and protected from exposure to dip 
tanks, spray booths, storage and mixing room for flammable liquids or 
exposure from or to the diffusion of flammable air vapour mixtures. 

4.4 Ovens shall be readily accessible with adequate space above to 
permit installation of automatic sprinklers, proper use of hose streams, 
the proper functioning of explosion vents, inspection and maintenance. 

4.5 Combustible roofs and floors of ovens shall be ventilated to keep 
temperature below 71°C or shall be well insulated. 

4.6 The external temperature of the floor near the oven shall not be 
more than 121°C when supporting floor is of concrete, steel channels or 
tiles. Adequate insulation therefore should be further provided, 
equivalent to the insulation provided for the oven walls and roof, bearing 
in mind the need of protection against mechanical damage or abrasion. 

4.7 When oven ducts or stacks pass through combustible walls, floors or 
roofs, adequate insulation and clearance shall be provided to prevent 
surface temperature of combustible materials exceeding 71°C. 

5. MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION 

5.1 The construction of all parts, whether specifically covered by this 
standard or not, shall be in accordance with reasonable concepts of 
safety, substantiality and durability. The equipment and its construction 
shall provide at least a performance level equivalent to that covered 
herein. 



w 



BATCH TYPE 



CONTINUOUS TYPE 



N3 

to 

00 



PORTABLE CORE 



CABINET TYPE 



I 

HORIZONTAL 



1 

PORTABLE 
HEATERS FOR 
DRYING OF 
MOULO ANO 
CORES IN SITU 



WITH COMPART- 
MENTS 



WITH EXTERNAL 
TRAYS AND TRAY 

ASSEMBLIES 



STEEL BAND 



FLIGHT 
CONVEYOR 



ROLLER 
HEARTH 



I I 
VERTICAL MONORAIL 

LOOP 
I 

COMBINED HORIZON 
TAL AND VERTICAL 

j 1 , 

FIXED TRAY REMOVABLE 
OR RACK TROLLEY 

WHELL 



STATIC CABINETS 



MOVABLE CABINETS m I " 

SIMPLE VERTICAL 
OR LOOP 



WITH IN-BUILT 
RACKS 



WITHOUT RACKS AND 
EXTERNAL LOADING 



ORAWER 

TYPE 

OVENS 



MONORAIL 

TRAY 

LOADING 



I 
CHARGING MAC 
HINE FLOOR 
OPERATED OR 
OVER HUNG 
UNIT 



1 

TROLLIES WITH LIGHT WHEELS 
WHICH CAN BE TRANSPORTED 
ON THE FACTORY SHOP FLOORS 



to 

00 



I 

MIXED AND COMBINED 
HORtZONTAL AND 
VERTICAL LOOP 



FIXED TRAY 
OR RACK 



1 

REMOVABLE TROLLEY 
WITH WHEEL 



BELT TYPE WITH LIMITED 
MOVEMENTS BETWEEN 
FIXED LOADING STATIONS 



ELEVATOR TYPE IN 
CONJUCTION WITH IN-OUT 
MOVING CARS 



CARS AT FIXED 
LOCATION AND 
IN-OUT TYPE 



Fio. 1 Classification of Ovens 



IS : 102S8 - 1982 



EXHAUST 
FAN 




COMBUSTION 
CHAMBER 



\J c 



? 



HOT AIR 
GENERATOR 



DILUTION 
AIR 

r RESH AIR 
BLOWER 



SCHEME 1 



BURNER 




■H — OVEN 



RECIRCULATION \ 
FAN 



SCHEME II 



DILUTION 
AIR 




BURNER 



i 



EXHAUST 



CIRCULATION 
FAN 



OVEN 



COMBUSTION 
CHAMBER 




SCHEME 111 



Fig. 2 Classification of Hot Air Generator Systems 

7 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

5.2 The oven shall be constructed of panels having hot rolled sheet steel 
and shall be not less than 1*6 mm thick with 125 mm mineral insulation, 
uniformly packed to provide even protection and to prevent shifting. 
The panels shall have adequate expansion joints to withstand bending 
stresses and to prevent bulging when fabricated with the structural of 
the oven. 

5.3 Oven structural supports and conveyors shall be designed with 
adequate factors of safety, at the maximum operating temperatures 
against the strains imposed by expansion. 

5.4 Adequate facilities for access shall be provided to permit proper 
inspection and maintenance, such as ladders, steps and guard rails, etc. 

5.5 Auxiliary equipment, such as conveyors, racks, trays, shelves and 
hangers shall be noncombustible and designed to facilitate cleaning. 

5.6 Burners of all types shall be substantially constructed and guarded 
to resist mechanical damage. 

5.7 Combustion safeguard mounts, and control devices shall be so 
arranged that the flame detecting element is correctly positioned. 

5.8 If the temperature of the exterior of oven exceeds 71°C, it should be 
guarded by location guard rails, shields and insulation to prevent 
accidental contact with operating personnel. 

6. EXPLOSION VENTS 

6.1 For fuel fired ovens, in which there is no explosive solvent hazard 
and is equipped with all recommended fuel safety devices, an explosion 
venting ratio of 1 : 9 ( one square metre of vent area to every 9 m 3 of 
oven volume ) should be provided. 

6.2 Such vents, where possible, should be placed at the top of the oven 
or inside walls and so located that the employees are not exposed to 
injury. 

6.3 Explosion relief vents for long ovens shall be reasonably distributed 
throughout the entire oven length. 

6.4 The oven location should permit the shortest and most direct path 
for exhaust and relief ducts for discharging into atmosphere. 

7. DUCTS 

7.1 Ducts shall be constructed entirely of sheet steel or other non- 
combustible material, having adequate strength and rigidity to meet 
the conditions of service and installation requirements. 

8 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

7.2 The surface temperature of all ducts, their backings, brackets and 
hangers should not exceed 71°C and they should be adequately lagged 
with mineral wool insulation. 

7.3 All ducts shall be tight and leak proof throughout and shall have no 
openings other than those required for operation and maintenance. 

7.4 Dampers in the ducts, which affect the volume of fresh air admitted 
and vapours or gases exhausted from the oven, shall be so designed that 
when closed they shall pass the volume required for safe ventilation. 

7.5 All exposed hot fan casings and hot ducts within 2 metres of the 
building floor shall be protected to prevent any injury to personnel. The 
temperature shall not exceed 71°C. 

7.6 Exhaust ducts shall not discharge near doors or windows or other 
air intakes in a manner that shall permit re-entry of exhaust products 
into the building. 

7.7 Handholes for damper and shoot cleanout hole shall be equipped 
with tight fitting doors, with substantial latches and gaskets of sufficient 
durability to withstand normal usage. 

8. DOORS 

8.1 Doors shall be constructed in a similar manner as the oven panels 
and braced sufficiently and ruggedly against warpage due to heat. 

8.2 Doors weighing more than 23 kg shall have a spring counter-balance 
or friction control, as a preliminary step. 

8.3 For the vertically sliding doors, they shall slide up and down against 
steel guides and over rugged door frames which do not get warped. 

8.4 Each door shall be equipped with an angle extension which when the 
door is closed shall fit into a sand seal above the door way. The sand 
seal and the door guides prevent escape of heat and gases from the door 
front. 

8.5 Each door shall have a set of safety type quick acting roller cams 
which shall hold the door tightly against the oven frame and shall also 
permit the door to serve as an oven relief area. 

8.6 The door operation may be pneumatic or motorized. In case it is 
hydraulic type, it should not use petroleum and other combustible 
hydraulic fluids. If at all it shall be used, the system shall be designed 
to minimize the possibility of fluid release, which may result in fire or 
explosion. 

8.7 For pneumatic and hydraulic door operations, the cylinders shall be 
cushioned at both ends with speed control, solenoid valves and remote 



IS ; 10298 - 1982 

push button control station. For the pneumatic system a lubricator, 
pressure regulator and filter unit shall be provided for each cylinder 
location. 



9. CHARACTERISTICS OF FUELS 

9,1 In conducting the performance tests, fuels having characteristics as 
shown below shall be used: 



i) Fuel oil 



ii) Liquified petroleum 
gas ( LPG ) 

' iii) LPG + air mixture 

iv) Natural gas ( Baroda 
gas ) 

v) Coke oven gas 
vi) Producer gas 



Heating Value* 

10 000 kcal/kg 

11 800kcal/m 3 



Sp Gr at 15°C 

0*546 (for liquid 
with respect to 
water — 1 ) 

1*830 ( for gas with 
respect to 
air ~ 1 ) 

12 670 kcal/m 3 * 1*42 ( with respect to 

air — 1 ) 

1 19 000 kcal/m 3 * 0'778 ( with respect to 

air = 1 ) 

4 200 kcal/m 3 * 0'45 ( with respect to 

air ~ 1 ) 

1 300 kcal/m 3 * 0*20 ( with respect to 

air = 1 ) 



10. FUEL SAFETY CONTROL 

10,1 Fuel safety control covers appJiances, such as safety shut off valve,, 
flame detection unit, time-delay relay ( TDR ) pressure switches — high 
and low, supervisory cocks, solenoid valves, etc. These devices shall be 
used to provide: 

a) Sufficient pre-ventilation, 

b) Sufficient ventilation during operation, 

c) Control of fuel combustion, and 

d) Oven temperature protection. 

10.1.1 Pre-ventilation or Purging 

a) Pre-ventilation is essential for all ovens in which the fuel may 
accumulate during a shut down period or after an accidental 
flame failure; 



♦The heating value refers to }5 C C, 760 mm mercury pressure and dry gas. 

10 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

b) For oven volumes less than 10 m 3 , the operation of purging may 
be omitted if the doors are opened for turning on the heat 
again; 

c) In all other ovens, of volume more than 10 m 3 , all doors, manholes 
and explosion vents shall be opened in such a way that the total 
vent area is 1 m 2 for every 4*5 m 3 of the oven; 

d) An approved time delay relay ( TDR ) shall be arranged in the 
safety control circuit and set so as to require the operation of 
exhaust and recirculating fans for sufficient time to provide 4 
( four ) oven volume changes of fresh air before the fuel is turned 
on or the conveyor is operated. An audible and visible alarm 
shall operate during the purge; 

e) Combustion blower shall be interlocked so that it may not be 
started, until the purge is completed; and 

f) Automatic recycling after accidental flame failure is not allowed. 
10*1*2 Ventilation 

a) Exhaust ducts pockets shall be located in the area of greatest 
concentration of fumes and pockets of static gases; and 

b) All exhaust shall be equipped by mechanical means using power 
driven fans. Each oven shall be equipped with its own indivi- 
dual exhaust fan and not a common system, serving other ovens 
or equipment. 

10.1*3 Control of Fuel Combustion — To control the fuel combustion the 
following protective devices may be provided: 

a) Safety Shut-off Valve — The primary safety shut-off valve used in 
the main fuel supply line shall be manually opened, automatically 
closed type. This valve shall be properly interlocked to shut 
down upon any abnormal operating conditions or failure of safety 
control circuit. A leak test facility shall be provided down- 
stream of fuel supply shut-off valve. 

W\ Flame Detection Device — It detects the presence or absence of flame 
and shall automatically shut off the fuel supply in the event of 
flame outage. The flame detection equipment shall have safe 
start check and 2 to 4 seconds flame failure response time. The 
flame detector shall be interlocked to shut down individual 
burners, separate zones, or the entire oven at the option of the 
manufacturer. 

c) Pressure Switch — A pressure activated device is arranged to 
effect a safety shutdown of the burner or burners from starting in 

11 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

the event of a malfunction with respect to the pressure of the fuel 
or combustion air. Both automatic and manual reset type 
pressure switches are acceptable. They shall be interlocked with 
a safety-shut off valve to stop the fuel flow when abnormal fuel 
pressure or combustion air pressure occur. The abnormal 
pressures may be higher or lower than specified for safe and 
correct operation of burner zones or entire oven. 

d) Safety Blow Device — It is a device provided near the outlet of 
each gas mixing machine, where the nominal size of piping is 
larger than 65 mm to protect the machine in the event of air 
explosion through an automatic fire check, covering a flame 
arrester, a blow out disk, provision of automatic shutting of the 
supply of air gas mixture. 

e) Ignition System — Ovens when operating below 760°C shall have 

burner ignition by spark ignited interrupted pilots, torch or by 
direct spark ignited self piloted burners. The burners shall 
produce stable flame during the trial-for- ignition period. When 
pilots, or main burners are spark-ignited, the spark shall be 
shut-off at the end of the trial-for-ignition period. 

10.1,4 Excess Temperature Controller — It shall be provided and suitably 
interlocked with the safety control circuit so that all the main burners 
controlled by the circuit shall be shut off in the event of excess 
temperatures. It shall not automatically re-open the fuel valve. This 
control shall be in addition to any normal temperature control devices 
used. 

10.2 To ensure further the closure of all individual main burners cocks, 
before the main burner shut off valve may be opened, the fuel safety 
control system shall guarantee the following interlock operations also, 
namely: 

a) combustion air pressure is normal, 

b) atomizing medium pressure is normal, 

c) normal gas pressure in the pilot is normal, 

d) ventilation fan is operating, 

e) pre-ventilation purge is completed, and 

f) the combustion safeguard of the pilot opens its safety solenoid/ 
shut-off valve. 

10.3 Typical arrangement for fuel safety control for gas fired and oil 
fired heating systems is shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 respectively. 

11. FUEL OIL AND FUEL GAS BURNERS 

11.1 The main burner system shall operate on high-low flame. For oil 
burners one of the following alternatives shall be adopted: 

12 



2 



BLOWER 



AUTO AIR CONTROL 
VALVE 



AIR 



GAS 



ORIP O SSURE SWI 

caps y* ^CTpiloTh 

^L MANUAL SSURE 



.MANUAL 
SHUT OFF 
VALVE 




■fXI t*J 



GAS/AIRJ A 
RATIO J 
REGULATOR 



■E2- 



IGH PRE-, 

iwr rfph^ ator ^ PIL0T PIL0T ZE R 

ING REGULATOR SOLENOID REGULATOR 

VALVE 



H3 



MANUAL AIR 
VALVE 




-PILOT 

BURNER 



ULTRAVIOLET 
FLAME DETECTOR' 



II 




<fi 



=^ s 



Fig. 3 Safety Control for Gas Fired Burner 



$ 



to 

8 



BLOWER 



[•LOW AIR PRESSURE 
SWITCH 

AUTOMATIC AIR 
.CONTROL VALVE 




en 



8 

00 



8 



_ ^_ MANUAL AIR 

? frgH VALVE 

FLEXIBLE 
CONNECTION 

PILOT 
^BURNER 




OIL RING 
MAIN 



AIR/OIL RATIO 
REGULATOR 



ULTRA VIOLET 
FLAME OETECTOR 



Fig. 4 Safety Control for Oil Fired Burner 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

a) Self Proportioning Low Air Pressure Oil Burner with Single Lever Air 
Oil Control Lever — The control lever may be operated manually 
or by a reversible modulating servo-motor or a pneumatic 
cylinder. The single lever operation shall permit automatic 
proportioning of air-oil ratio, based on the feed back received 
from the temperature control instrument. 

b) Low Air Pressure Oil Burner — It may have external ratio regulator 
for proportioning air/oil ratio. The regulator may be used for 
individuals burners, or zones or entire oven and cross-connected 
to combustion air line downstream of air control valve. The 
change in pressure across the valve will be the pressure impulse 
on the diaphragm of the regulator. The oil flow will be 
thereby regulated automatically in proportion with air flow. The 
oil pressure before the ratio regulator shall be 1"5 — 2*0 kg/ cm 2 . 
The air control valve may be manually or server motor operated 
by the feed back received from the temperature control instru- 
ment. These burners shall have separate inlet ports for atomizing 
and combustion air. 

11.2 The combustion and atomizing air pressure shall be specified by 
the burner manufacturer but the atomizing air pressure shall be not less 
than 620 mm WG for light distillate oils and 970 mm WG for heavy oil. 
Excess air burners with high flame stability is desirable for low 
temperature ovens. These burners shall also be capable of firing on 
ratio. 

11.3 Gas burners shall be essentially nozzle mix type. Air gas regulator 
shall be used for proportioning gas with regard to air by cross connect- 
ing the regulator to the main air line down stream of the air control 
valve. Burners shall have high degree of stability under excess air 
conditions. 

12. BURNER CHARACTERISTICS 

12.1 Burner appliance for use with any fuel shall be tested in its own 
specific equipment and with reference to the rated input and the turn- 
down ratio. 

12.2 Adequate means shall be provided for ease in observation of the 
conditions at the burner and its ignition zone. 

12.3 Each burner shall be equipped with an approved instantaneous flame 
sensing combustion safeguard arranged through a suitable approved 
safety shut off valve to shut off fuel to the burner in the event of flame 
failure. 

12.4 Flames on their own shall be stable even when variations in 
burning characteristics of the fuel, normal variations in fuel handling 

15 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

and the burner intervals introduce an uncertainty to the lower operating 
limit. 

12.5 The flame sensing element of the combution safeguard shall be so 
located as to prove the pilot flame and monitor the intersection of the 
main and the pilot burner flame paths, so that prompt reliable ignition 
by the pilot is assured before the main fuel valves are opened. 

12.6 The main burner shall be immediately ignited by the pilot even 
when it is reduced to a minimum flame, that shall barely hold the flame 
sensing relay of the combustion safeguard in the energized ( flame ) 
position. 

12.7 There shall be no automatic recycling after accidental flame failure. 
All fuel shall be shut off that is, safety shut-off valves tripped/closed. The 
attention of an operator is necessary before the next pilot-flame establish- 
ing period of trial-for ignition can start. 

13. PILOT 

13.1 The pilot shall not deposit appreciable carbon during its operation. 

13.2 It shall not flash back and shall remain stable even during 
substantial fluctuations in draft or back pressure. 

13.3 The gas pressure on the inlet side of the pilot burner shall be super- 
vised by an approved gas pressure switch, in conjunction with a low 
combustion air pressure switch, a checking pressure switch ( which super- 
vises the individual burner cocks ) and a shunting low gas pressure 
switch installed down-stream from the main safety shut-off valve. 

14. PRESSURE SWITCH 

14.1 These pressure activated devices shall withstand the fuel being 
handled, the cyclic operations required for the fuel safety control and 
shall be extremely reliable in its function. 

14.2 The quality of the diaphragm shall be such as to sustain a maximum 
temperature rise of 65°C allowed near the burner system. 

14.3 In the case of liquid fuels, low oil temperature limit switch shall be 
provided so as to guarantee the correct viscosity of the oil through the 
burner nozzle, for good atomization. 

15. TEMPERATURE CONTROLLERS 

15*1 These devices shall measure and indicate the temperature accurately 
and automatically, with the help of a thermocouple or mercury-m-steel 
thermometer and control the heat input of the burner by operating the 
reversible servo-motor or the pneumatic cylinder. The exact location of 

16 



18:10296-1982 



the thermocouple shall be carefully chosen so as to represent the average 
of the temperature distribution pattern in the entire oven. The instru- 
ment however shall control within ± 5°C of the desired temperature at 
the chosen location of the thermocouple. 

15.2 The excess temperature controller shall cut off the fuel supply when 
the temperature exceeds a safe limit at a location, from where the 
thermocouple or thermometer probe shall monitor the temperature which 
directly affects safety in most cases. 



16. THERMAL EFFICIENCY 

16.1 The design of an oven is invariably tailor made. As such 
thermal efficiency of an oven shall depend on a number of factors, 
calculate thermal efficiency the following data shall be required: 

kcal/h 

h 

°G 

m2 



the 
To 



a) Maximum and minimum rated heat input 

b) Baking and cooling cycle time 

c) Maximum variation in baking temperature 

d) Maximum external surface area of the oven 
casing 

e) Maximum temperature of the casing surface 

f) Fresh air admitted /hour 
Temperature of fresh air 

g) Exhaust gas volume/hour 
Exhaust gas temperature 

h) Recirculation fan capacity 

Temperature of the gas handled 
Static pressure of the fan 



j) Internal volume of the oven 

No. of volume changes/hour ^ 

( Recirculation fan capacity j>- 

Internal oven volume ) J 



°C 

m3/h 

°C 

m3/h 
°C 

m3/h 

°C 

mm of 
water 
s^au^e 

m 3 
No./h 



17. DESIGN 

17.1 The oven shall be designed keeping in view the various parameters 
involved. 

17.2 The following information shall be required: 

a) Type of oven ( see Fig. 1 ); 

b) Type of heating arrangement and combustion details ( see 
Fig. 2 ); 

17 



IS : 10298 - 1982 

c) Rated heat input ( kcal/h ); 

d) Turn-down ratio; 

e) Fuel, its characteristics, heating value and sp gr; 

f) No. of burners; 

g) Manual lighting, fixed continous pilot, high-low main burner 
flame; 

h) Vent area locations, No. of latches and total area per unit volume 

of the oven; 
j) Details of fuel safety control, location and type of operation for 

emergency; 
k) Oven panel construction details, its thermal conductivity, kcal; 
m) Size of the exhaust duct; 
n) Size and location of cleanout doors; and 
p) Fire protection for oven. 

17,3 To approve the design, construction and performance of an oven, 
the following data shall be required. 

a) Mould Core Data 

i) No. of cores/moulds, per hour; 

ii) Types of crores/moulds with respect to their surface area, 
maximum thickness and quantity of each type; 

iii) Maximum percent of moisture, in cores, by weight, in kg/h; 

iv) Litres of core oils/kg of core sand, raw linseed oil Pertel oil, 
etc, which oxidize and polymerize at the baking temperature; 

v) kg of steel/hour; 

vi) kg of dry sand/hour; 

vii) Gas in ml per g of green core/mould; and 

viii) Gas in ml per g of baked/mould. 

b) Drying Characteristics 

i) Fresh air temperature and relative humidity; 
ii) Baking temperature; 
iii) Baking time; and 
iv) Cooling time required after baking. 



18 



