**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n f im^NS ^g^T^s^i ra^gg > ^uiKa*g£a^ 



IS 12867 (1989) : PVC Handrail Covers 
15: Builder Hardware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Specification [CED 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



REAFFIRMED 2010 



IS 12867 : 1989 



Indian Standard 

PVC HANDRAIL COVERS — 
SPECIFICATION 

UDC 692-633 [ 678-743-22 ] 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

JW$ i99&. Price Groap 2 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 2008 

TO 

IS 12867 : 1989 PVC HANDRAIL COVERS — 

SPECIFICATION 

(Page 1, Table 1, coll) — Substitute the tolerances of A' against sizes 25 
mm, 40 mm, 50 mm, and 65 mm as ' + 2 ' for l ± V. 

- 



(CED 15) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Builders's Hardware Sectional Committee, CED 15 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 November 1989, 
after the draft finalized by the Builders Hardware Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Handrails are provided along staircases ard balconies. These have been conventionally covered 
with wood or aluminium. PVC handrail covers have been introduced and are in use now for more 
than two decades in the country. The advantages of PVC as material for handrails include; design 
flexibility, availability in desired colours, and ease of installation, besides its availability in longer 
lengths. Moreover PVC handrails are practically maintenace free. 

Since PVC handrail covers in various colours, these are recommended for use depending upon 
their location-outdoor or indoor. Normally bright colours other than black fade in course of time 
when installed exposed to outdoor weather. Only black colour PVC handrail cover is recommend- 
ed for outdoor exposed use. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



B«M7:1»»9 



Indian Standard 

PVC HANDRAIL COVERS 
SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

LI This standard covers the dimensions and 
requirements for PVC handrail covers for me 
on metal strip handrails. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 IS 8543 ( Part 4/Section 1 ) : 1984 'Method 
of testing plastics: Part 4 Short term mechani- 
cal properties. Section 1 Determination of ten- 
sile properties* is necessary adjunct to this 
standard. 

3 MATERIALS 

3.1 Handrails covers are manufactured by ex- 
trusion using plasticized PVC compound of 
desired formulation and colour. 

4 SIZES 

4.1 PVC handrail covers are normally made 
available in widths to match the desired width 
of metal strip, suitably welded as part of the 
handrail. With It view to providing comfortable 
frip. The contmon sizes shall suit metallic flats 
of width 2$ mm, 40 mm, 50 mm and 65 mm. 

5 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES 

5.1 A typical cross-section of PVC handrail is 
given in Fig. 1 and dimensions and tolerances 
are given in Table 1. 



Table 1 Dimensions tad Toleraaees of PVC 
Handrail Cover* 





(Clause 5 A ) 
All dimensions in millimetres. 




SUM 




Distent) 


ons 

Mm 






A 


B 


D 


25 


6±\ 


5 + 1 
-0 

5 + 1 
-6 

54-1 
-0 

5+ 1 
-0 


3 


25 + 2 


40 

50 


7±1 

8±1 


4 

4 


40 + 2 
50 + 2 


65 


9±1 


5 


65 + 2 



NOTE — Thickness B ii given for metallic flat 
thickness of 5 mm. For 6 mm flats the thickness B 
sbill be* + 1 mm. 
-0 



7 INSTALLATION 

7.1 The method of installation of PVC hand- 
rail covers is given in Annex D. 

8 MARKING 

8.1 Each handrail covers shall be marked with 
the manufacturer's name or trade-mark on the 
body, either inside or outside as found conveni- 
ent to the manufacturer. 



j=S 



-PVC HANDRAIL 
COVE ft 



\\\\\\\\VV\\\\\\VV2 . 



Fi«. 1 



METALLIC FLAT 



Typical Cross-Section of PVC 
Handrail 



5.2 The handrail covers should be supplied in 
overall lengths as agreed between purchaser and 
supplier. However for general use handrail 
covers should be supplied in 25 m lengths. The 
length of handrail covers supplied should not be 
less than specified. 

6 TESTS 

*.l The handrail covers shall conform to the 
requirements given in Table 2. 



8,1.1 Each handrail cover may also be marked 
with the standard mark by embossing at inter- 
vals of not more than 3 m. Marking shall be 
made on the body of the handrails. 

9 PACKING 

9.1 The handrail covers are wrapped in poly- 
ethylene sheeting and then packing in gunny 
cloth/woven polyethylene fabric. These bundles 
are tied tightly by plastic strappings in two 
orthogonal directions. Each bundle shall indi- 
cate manufacturers name or trade-mark, size of 
handrail cover colour and length. 

10 STORAGE 

10.1 The material shall be stored with bundle, 
lying fiat and height of bundle not exceeding 
2'5 m. Heavy material should not he placed on 
top of the bundles. Sharp and metallic objects 
should not be allowed to scratch the surface of 
handrail cover. These precautions should also 
be followed during transport of handrail. 



1 



IS 12867 : 1989 



Table 2 Rcq*lr«»e»t* of PVC Handrail Cowt 



SI No Characteristics 

(1) (2) 

i) Heat ageitii and efttadation 



ii) Tensile itrcogth test 

iii) Elongation 

iv) Hardness 

v) Resistance to combustion 



Reqalrenenti 
(3) 

No extodttipu of pla0ticfe«r 
tfaalj be apparent po% ttudl 
there be any c&ange in 
appearance. 

Tensile strength shall not be 
less than 10 N/mm« 
Minimum elongation sball 
be IIS percent 
Minimum value of Rock- 
wall Hardness Number shall 
beL65. 

The specimen shall not burn 
to the 25 mm mark and 
shall not show any flame or 
after glow after 5 seconds 
after the burner has been 
removed. 



Methods of Test 

(4) 
Annex A 



IS 8543 ( Part 4/Section I ) : 
J984 

IS 8543 ( Part 4/Section 1 ) : 

1*84 

Annex 3 



Annex C 



ANNEX A 
[Table 2, Item (i) ] 

METHOD OF TEST FOR HEAT AGEING AND EXUDATION 



A-l OBJECT 

A-1.1 To determine the quality of PVC after 

ageing. 

A-2 APPARATUS 

A-2.1 A circulating air oven capable of main- 
taining a temperature of 70 ± 1°C and a 25 mm 
diameter mandrel. 

A-3 PROCEDURE 

A-3.1 The test specimen shall be a strip of the 



25 mm wide and 225 mm long and shall be 
maintained at a temperature of 70 ± 1°C in the 
circulating air oven for 15 days. At the end of 
this time the specimen shall be removed from 
the oven, and then allowed to cool. After a 
farther period of 60 minutes at 27 ± 2°C the 
specimen shall be examined for exudation by 
lightly rubbing the wearing surface with a clean 
white filter paper. A greasy stain on the paper 
shows that exudation has occurred and consti- 
tute a failure of the test. 



ANNEX B 
[ Table 2, Item (iv) ] 

TEST FOR SURFACE HARDNESS 



B-l OBJECT 

B-l.l The object of the surface hardness test is 
to ensure that the surface of handrail is able to 
resist unacceptable indentation. 

B-2 APPARATUS 



B-2.1 Rockwell Hardness Tester 

Having an L scale indentor, 
6'330 ± 0002 5 mm and an 
loadof588'4N. 

B-3 PROCEDURE 



a diameter of 
effective major 



B-3.1 Condition the sample for 24 hours at a 
temperature of 27 ± 2 C C and a relative humi- 
dity of 65 ± 5 percent. Bring the indentor into 
the lightest possible contact with any appro- 



priate flat part of the handrail but not within 
6 mm of the edge or previous indentations 
and always on the same face of the specimen as 
any previous indentations. Apply the 'minor' load 
of 98*1 N which operates when the small poin- 
ter is at zero and large pointer is within 5 ± 5 
divisions of the 830 or 'set* position on the red 
scale. Within 10 seconds, apply the major load 
by operating the trip lever. Remove the major 
load 15 db 10 seconds after its application. Read 
15 seconds after removing the major load, to 
the nearest full division, the Rockwell hardness 
on the red scale. 

B-3.2 Repeat the test five times, on the surface 
of handrail. 

B-4 REPORTING 

B-4.1 Calculate the average of the six readings. 



IS 12867: 1989 



ANNEX C 

[ Table 2, Item (v) ] 

METHOD OF TEST FOR RESISTANCE TO COMBUSTION 



C-l The object of this test is to check that the 
material of the conduit neither supports com- 
bustion nor easily ignites when heated in a 
flame. 

C-2 TEST SPECIMEN 

C-2.1 A line shall be drawn across the speci- 
men at 25 mm from one end. 

C-3 PROCEDURE 

C-3.1 The specimen shall be tested in a drought- 
free atmosphere. 

C-3.2 The specimen shall be clamped in a rigid 
support at its unmarked and so that its longi- 
tudinal axis is horizontal and the line drawn as 
in C-2.1 is clearly visible, 

C-3.3 A piece, 125 mm square, of clean wire 
gauze having 6 meshes/cm shall be clamped in 
the horizontal position 6' 5 mm below the speci- 



men with 6'5 mm of the unsupported end of the 
specimen projecting beyond the end of the 
gauze. An alcohol lamp or Bunsen burner, with 
a nonluminous flame 125 mm to 20mm in 
height, shall be placed under the free edge of 
the specimen so that the top of the flame just 
touches it. 

The intensity of the flame shall be tested as 
follows: 

A bare copper wire, 0'7l mm in diameter and 
having a free length not less than 100 mm, shall 
be inserted in the flame 50 mm above the top of 
the burner. If the wire takes more than 6 
seconds to melt, it is an indication that the 
burner is not working satisfactorily for the pur- 
pose of the test. 

The flame shall be removed after 10 seconds 
and the specimen shall not continue to burn 
more than 5 seconds if the specimen is 
ignited. 



ANNEX D 
( Clause 7.1 ) 

INSTALLATION OF PVC HANDRAIL COVERS 



D-l The handrail-railings with suitable metallic 
flat support of desired width and thickness are 
required for receiving the PVC handrail covers 
of matching dimensions. Care should be taken 
that the MS flat welded over the railings is flat 
and uniform/smooth. 

D-2 The PVC handrail-cover is suitably heated 

with (blow lamp) on the inside face uniformly 

at a temperature of 80°C approximately, till it 

softens and becomes flexible. Then mount one 

edge of the handrail on the 

the railing and by an outward 

hand, stretch out the other 

rail and fit it over the other 

runner. The handrail cover 

wrapped tightly with a 

nuously so as to make it 



metal runner of 
movement of the 
end of the hand- 
end of the metal 
should then be 
cloth bandages conti- 
hug the metal runner. 



The handrail is ready for use on its cooling. 

D-3 Fixing of the PVC handrail cover is ad- 
vised from the top of the staircase, and carried 
downward. Overheating of the PVC handrail 
cover is avoided, or else it will deform itself 
into design not acceptable by the MS flat sup- 
port. 

D-4 When heated the handrail cover tends to 
stretch. After fixing the handrail cover should 



not be out off flush with the end of the support. 
A margin of 20-30 mm is allowed for contrac- 
tion, when uniformly cool, the extra portion of 
handrail can be cut of the edges and a flat piece 
of PVC can be welded to form a covering cap. 
The joint should be made smooth on cooling. 

D-5 The ends of two pieces could be suitably 
welded when required. The end to be joined 
are pressed against a hot metal plate to permit 
softening of the PVC material and the metal 
plate is withdrawn downward while keeping the 
handrail ends pressed against each other till the 
joint cools down. The excess material visible on 
the surface of the joint is trimmed off with a 
sharp knife or blade and later the joint surface 
is filled with a rought file, and finished with sand 
paper. In case of any damage to the handrail in 
use, similar process is repeated. 

D-6 After installation, removal of weld marks 
and scratches, etc, the handrail cover should be 
cleaned with a rag soaked in quick drying sol- 
vent such as methylene chloride or methyl-ethyl 
ketone without applying any pressure. Polishing 
with colourless wax polish is also recommended. 
Periodical cleaning with rag soaked in solution 
of good quality soap of detergent will help re- 
move dirt-stains and grease marks. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications )» BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any* 
are issued from time lo time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS 
giving the following reference : 

Doc : No, CED 15 ( 4539 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters : 

Man&k Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams tjManaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.l.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C.l.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 60011.3 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Blanches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM. 



Printed at Swatantra ^harat Press, Delhi, India 



