**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



g^l/l:^:^i^J^^lf/lJJ^i^N^^ g^^TS^,^^ 



IS 11131 (1984) : wooden casks and barrels [CED 
and Timber Stores] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Timber 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : mat -1114 

Indian Standard R^^Sl^ll!"^' 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

WOODEN CASKS AND BARRELS 



UDC 621-796 133 [67406] 




1N0IAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 UaIiaDUR SHAH ^^^\^ MAILQ 

' NEW l^GLHl IIP002 



Gr 2 



.4^(7 1985 



IS > 11131 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WOODEN CASKS AND BARRELS 

Wood and Wood Products Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 16 

Chairman 

Shri a. C. Sekhar 

17-1-391/54, Subramanya Nagar 

Saidiibad, Hyderabad 500659 

Memiers Representing 

Db K. C. Azad Horticulture Deptt, Govt of Hiniachal Pradesh, 

Simla 

Shbi H. L. Kochher { Alternate ) 
Shbi R. BAiiASt}BBAMAKTAK Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Cochin 

Shbi S K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi D. K. Kantjngo ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. G. DESHMimH Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shbi G. S. Ptjbtjshothaman ( Alternate ) 
DiBECTOB Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 

Dk H, N. Jagadbesh ( Alternate) 
Shbi M. P. Dubey Bharat heavy Electricals Limited, Bhopal 

Shbi S. K. Dutxa ( Alternate I ) 

Shbi K. V. L, K. Vekubao ( Alternate II ) 
Shbi P. T. Kansaea Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Pune 

Shbi A. H. Bakbe ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S, P. Chopra ( Alternate II ) 
Shbi S. Kbishnamttbthy Directorate General Ordnance Factories, Jabalpur 

Shbi p. K. Karmaxar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Kui^karni Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd, Pune 

Shri D. S, Dateb ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Y. P. Maukb Composite Wood Products, Bombay 

Shbi S. N. Mhhba Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr a. N. Nayeb Skan Packaging Consultants, New Delhi 

Shri Sanjay K. Naybb ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Paranjpe Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

Shbi O, P. Pbahladka Hitachi-KK Mfg Co, Calcutta 

Shbi S. P. Prahiadka ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11131 - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi p. S. Pbuthi Indian Pest Control Association, Bombay 

Shri p. V. Hbble ( Alternate ) 
ShriJR.. N. Saxena Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 

Deputy Director Traffic 
( Special Duty ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sharan Singh Directorate General of Supplies and Disposal, 

New Delhi 
ShriN. K. Shukla Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri P. K. Srivastava Escorts Limited, Faridabad 

Shri O. P. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
Capt N. a. Tamhanb Indian National Shipowners Association, Bombay 

Shri S. P. Abbey, Director General, ISl ( Ex-ojfficio Member) 

Senior Deputy Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shbi A. R. Gulati 

Senior Deputy Director ( MCPD ), ISI 



Grates and Packing Gases Subcommittee, MGPD 16:2 

Convener 
Shri N. K. Shukla Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Members 

Deputy Director, Traffic Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 
Rates 
Deputy Director Tbaffic 
( Special Duty ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. G. Deshmukh Indian Institute of packaging, Bombay 

Shri S. C, Purushothaman ( Alternate) 
Shri S.K, DiWAN Federation of Association of Small Industries of 

India, New Delhi 
Director Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 
Dr H. N. Jaoabeesb ( Alternate ) 
Shri Satya Narain Gabo Govind Narain & Bros, Kanpur 

Shbi Subesh Nabaih Garo ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Lauly The Indian Plywood Manufacturing Go Ltd, 

Bombay 
Lt-Col G. B. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Natbaj Sundaram Industries Pvt Ltd, Madurai 

Shri Nirmal SiKGH Directorate General of Inspection (Ministry of 

Defence ), New Delhi 
Shri G. G. Techchandani (Alternate) 
Shbi Sampuran Singh Tinpack Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Ma J T. K. SoHASHEKAR Madras Sapper Ex-servicemen's Rehabilitation 

Association, Bangalore 



IS : 11131 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WOODEN CASKS AND BARRELS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 14 November 1984, after the draft finalized by the Wood 
and Wood Products Containers Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Wooden casks and barrels of different sizes are used for packaging 
and storage of powders, semisolids, solids and liquids. It was felt 
necessary to standardize these casks to optimize design and lay down 
guidelines for the testing of these casks. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and methods of tests for 
wooden casks and barrels from 10 to 300 litres capacity. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition 
to those given in IS : 707-1968* and IS : 6703-1972t shall apply. 

2.1.1 Barrel — A bulged cylindrical container, of length greater than 
the breadth, made of wooden staves bound together with hoops and 
having two flat ends of equal diameter 

2.1.2 Cask — A term used synonymously with barrel, but usually of 
large size or capacity. Casks may be of slack or tight cooperage. 

2.1.3 Hoop — A circular band, of metal, wire or wood, used to hold the 
staves of a cask or barrel together and reinforce the same. 

3. CAPACITY AND CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 The casks/barrels shall be of the sizes and capacities as prescribed 
in Table 1. 



♦Glosiary of terms applicable to timber technology and utilization ( second revision ) . 
tGlossary of wooden packaging terms. 



IS : 11131 - 1984 





TABLE 1 


SIZES FOR WOODEN CASKS/BARRELS 










( Clause 3.1 ) 








Nominal 
Capacity 


External 
Height 


Top and 

Bottom 

Diameter 


Wall 
Thickness 


Number 


Hoops 
Width 


Thickness 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


litres 


mm 


mm 


mm 


mm 


mm 


mm 


10 


305 


190 


12 


4 


25 


1-25 


20 


455 


280 


12 


4 


25 


1-25 


40 


530 


345 


12 


6 


25 


1-25 


55 


610 


355 


12 


6 


25 


1-25 


90. 


760 


420 


20 


6 


35 


1-58 


100 


760 


460 


20 


6 


35 


1-58 


200 


900 


610 


25 


6 


50 


1-58 


300 


1 060 


660 


25 


6 


50 


1-58 


Note 


— Normal manut'acturiug tolerances are permissible for all d 


i mansions. 



3.2 The staves and planks used for the construction of casks/barrels shall 
be of thickness as given in col 4 of Table 1 . 

3.2,1 The planks shall be of 40 to 100 mm width for side walls 
and 70 to 150 mm width for the ends. 

4. MATERIALS 

4.1 The timber used for the construction of wooden casks/barrels shall be 
of any of the species given in Appendix A, depending on the contents to 
be filled. Any other species for specific purpose as agreeed to between 
the purchaser and the seller may also be used, 

4.2 The timber used for the construction shall be well seasoned to a 
moisture content not exceeding 15 percent when determined according to 
the method given in IS : 287-1973*. It shall be reasonably straight 
grained, free from knots, centreheart, insect attack, any kind of decay, 
brashness, dead knots, splits, warps or any other defects which would 



♦Rccommendatioas for maximum permissible moisture content for timber used for 
different purposes ( second revision ) . 



IS : 11131 *. 1984 



adversely affect the utility of the casks. Cracks, if any, shall be along 
the grain and not across the width. In the case of casks used for liquids, 
cracks shall not be permitted. 

4.3 Hoops and Rivets — The hoops shall be made of mild steel or 
wood. The number and width of mild steel hoops shall be as specified 
in Table 1. The hoops shall be attached by means of aluminium rivets. 



5. MANUFACTURE 

5.1 Unless otherwise specified, the wooden casks/barrels shall 
manufactured to the shape and design as shown in Fig. 1. 

BILOE HOOP 

HOOP RJVET 

QUARTER HOOP 
HEAD HOOP 



be 




STAVE 
JOINT 



-STAVe 

HOOP 
FASTENER 



HEAD 

JOINT BETWEEN 
HEAD SECTIONS 



Fig. 1 Wooden Casks 



WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

6.1 The surface of the wooden casks/barrels shall be smoothly finished. 
The workmanship and finish shall be good. 

6.2 The edges of the staves of the casks/barrels shall be suitably 
smoothened so that when two pieces are joined together, there is no gap. 
The top and bottom lids shall be fixed to the side wail by inserting the 
lids in the grooves provided for the same on the inside wall of the cask or 
barrel. The hoops shall then be put into position with the required 
pressure to reinforce the cask when the bulge in the centre is uniformly 
prepared. 



IS: 11131 -1984 
7» SAMPLING 

7,1 The norms of sampling and testing shall depend upon the contents to 
be filled into the casks and shall be done according to the mutual 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 

8. DELIVERY 

8.1 Unless, otherwise specified, the casks/barrels shall be delivered in a 
completely assembled form. 

9. TESTING 

9.1 Leakage Test — Each cask/barrel when used for packing liquids or 
semi-solids shall be subjected to water leakage test. The cask after 
filling with water at ambient temperature shall be left for one hour. 
The ends and wall joints shall be examined for any leakage of water by 
rotating it on sides. Initial leakage or seapage of water when the cask is 
new and dry shall not be considered as failure in this test, 

9.2 Drop Test — One cask/barrel of each capacity shall be subjected to 
drop test after filling it with Jthe intended contents or any other similar 
material as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer of 
casks. The height and number of drops shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer, 

9.3 Inclined Impact Test — One cask/barrel of each capacity shall be 
subjected to inclined impact test by rolling free on its sides on an inclined 
surface and stopping it against the impact surface or bumper. The 
length and height of the inclined surface shall be as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer [ see IS : 7028 ( Part 3 )-1973* ]. 

10. MARKING 

10.1 Unless otherwise specified, each cask/barrel shall be legibly and 
indelibly marked with the following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or initials or recognized trade-mark, if 
any; 

b) Year and month of manufacture; and 

c) Capacity in litres. 



•Performance test for complete filled transport packages : Part 3 Horizontal impact 
test, inclined plane test and pendulum test. 



IS : 11131 - 1984 

lOJ.l The cask/barrel may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

NoTB — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regula- 
tions made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for 
the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 4A ) 

TIMBER SPECIES SUITABLE FOR WOODEN 
CASKS AND BARRELS 

[ For wet coopered casksjbarrels {for liquids ) ] 

Quercus spp, ( Indian oak ) 
Grewia tillifolia ( dhaman ) 
Ougeinia Oojeinensis ( sandan ) 
Artocarpus hirsutus ( aini ) 
Dysexylum malabarteum ( white cedar ) 
Mangifera indica ( mango ) 
Gmelina arborea ( gamari ) 
Shorea robusta ( sal ) 
Lagorstroemia lanceolate ( bonteak ) 
Tectona grandis ( teak ) 

[ For dry coopered casksjbarrels {for powders^ etc ) ] 

In addition to the species already recommended for wet cooperage, 
the following species are suitable for dry cooperage: 

Boswellia serrata { salai ) 



IS : 11131 - 1984 

Hymenodutyen excelsum ( kuthan ) 
Picea smithiana ( spruce ) 
Lannea coromandeiica ( jhingan ) 
Terminalia paniculate ( kindal ) 
Machilus spp. ( machilus ) 
Albiziaodoratissima ( kala siris ) 



