**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10614 (1983) : Method for atomic absorption 
spectrophotometric determination of sodium and potassium 
[CHD 1: Inorganic Chemicals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: 10614- 1983 
( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



METHOD FOR ATOMIC 

ABSOR PTION SPFXTROPHO 10 M ETRIC 

DETERMINATION OF SODIUM AND 

POTASSIUM 



UDC 543-422 : 546'32/J^3 




© C&pyright mm 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, a bAHAUUR SHAH ZAFAli M.\RG 

NEW DELHI ItCJCWa 



IS : 10614 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC 

DETERMINATION OF SODIUM AND 

POTASSIUM 

Chemical Standards Sectional Committee, CDC 1 

Chairman Representing 

Db H. L. Bami Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi 

Members 

Dr K. Nabayanaswamy ( Alternate to 
DrH. L. Bami) 
Shbi K. D. Amre National Organic Chemicals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri S. B. Nanal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. A. AsHTAPTTTRE Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri P. K. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. M. Banebjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi P. K. Paik ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. S. Chadha Director General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Shbimatt Debi Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Db M. S. Chadha ^ Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Chief Chemist '* Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi 

Deputy Chief JChemist ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director ( Chemicals ) Department of Industries and Commerce, Govern- 
ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Deputy Directoe ( MCL ) ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director of Industries Director of Industries, Bombay 
( Ghemical/TD ) 
Assistant Director of 
Industries QM! ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Kbishnamoorthy Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shbi Bhupindeb Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. D. Malhotra Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

The Director General 
Geologic al Survey of 
India ( Alternate ) 
Ds B. N. Mattoo Maharashtra State Forensic Science Laboratory, 

Bombay 
Dr S. K. Meghal ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be aa infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10614 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr J. K. NiOAM Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Shri N. S. Birde ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. R. Pabbai Central Indian Pharmacopoeia Laboratory , 

Ghaziabad 
Shri J. K. Patwa Sarabhai M. ChemicalSj Vadodara 

Shbi D. C. Pbashar National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Dr a. K. Sabkab ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Ramamurthy Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri M, B. Unni ( Alternate I ) 

Shri S. K. Bose ( Alternate II ) 
Dr G. RamaK Rao Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri N. Rangaswamy ( Alternate ) 
Representative The Century Rayon, Kalyan 

Shri Om Pbasab ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. P. Sahakari Italab Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. S. Hokavar ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. R. Sant Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneshwar 

Dr T. p. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. SniTKiiA Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. Srinivasan Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. Mansukhani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mathtjr, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offido Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. Bakshi Gupta 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISX 



IS : 10614 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR ATOMIC 

ABSORPTION SPECTROPHOTOMETRIC 

DETERMINATION OF SODIUM AND 

POTASSIUM 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 15 June 1983, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 The atomic absorption spectrophotometric method is based on the 
fact that all elements when atomised will absorb light of the same wave- 
length, that they emit when excited. When a solution containing salts 
of sodium and potassium is introduced in the flame, the intensity of the 
transmitted radiation will decrease in proportion to the amount of ground 
state atoms present in the flame, that is, extent of the concentration of 
these elements in the solution. A hollow cathode lamp, made of the 
element to be determined, provides the source of radiation. The metal 
atoms to be measured are fed to the flame by aspirating the solution into 
the flame. A monochromator eliminates the unwanted radiation from 
the flame and permits mainly the radiation from the hollow cathode 
lamp to fall on the photosensitive device. The difference between the 
intensity of absorbed and reference beam is taken as the measure of 
concentration of the analysed element. 

0.3 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method for determination of sodium 
and potassium, employing atomic absorption spectrophotometric 
technique. 



••Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ) . 

3 



IS : 10614 - 1983 

2. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

2.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and deionized water shall 
be used in tests. 

Note — * Pure chemicals ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities 
which affect the results of analysis. 

3. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

3.1 The material is powdered and homogenized, so as to pass through 
150 micrometre IS sieve. A known mass of the air-dried sample is 
suitably dissolved in acid or acid mixtures, filtered and diluted to definite 
volume. This solution or its suitable dilutions are made to aspirate into 
the flame. Standards are also aspirated in the same way. If elements 
are to be determined in metals, they may be brought into solution using 
suitable acids. 

4. INTERFERENCE 

4.1 No chemical interferences have been found. Sodium and potassium 
are partially ionized in air-acetylene flame ( to suppress ionization add 
potassium nitrate or potassium chloride to give final concentration of 
2 000 jtig/ml of potassium in the solution, in which sodium has to be 
measured and add cesium nitrate or cesium chloride to give a final 
concentration of 1 000 jug/ml cesium in all solution including blank where 
potassium has to be measured ). By appreciable concentration of 
mineral acids present in the solution, the absorbance reading is reduced 
for both sodium and potassium. Hydrochloric, sulphuric, nitric and 
phosphoric acids cause decrease in the reading. Influence of nitric and 
sulphuric acid is mainly due to changes in physical properties and the 
aspiration rates of the solution. The influence of hydrochloric acid -and 
phosphoric acid is due to the evaporation process in the flame. 

4.2 Up to 160 ppm of aluminium, phosphate, sulphate and silicate do 
not interfere with low concentration of sodium, namely 2-10 ppm. But 
it is found that slight decrease in absorption occurs in the presence of high 
concentration of phosphates. But the same amount of aluminium, 
phosphate, sulphate and silicate do not interfere in potassium determi- 
nation in the presence of aluminium chloride ( 1 M ). 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer — It shall have follow- 
ing parameters. 

5.1.1 Lamp Current — As recommended by the instrument maker ( For 
instance, Perkin Elmer atomic absorption spectrophotometer suggests 
8mA and 12 m A for Na and K respectively ). 



IS : 10614 > 1983 



5.1.2 Fuel — acetylene. 

5.1.3 Support — air. 

5.1.4 Flame Stoichiometry — oxidizing air-acetylene flame. 

5.1.5 Wavelength and Working Range — It shall be as follows: 



Wavelength, nm 


Band Pass* , nm 


Working Range, (igjml 


Sodium Potassium 


r- 
Sodium 


Potassium 


Sodium 


— % 
Potassium 


589-0 766-5 


0-2 


0-5 


0-15 to 0-60 


0-5 to 2-0 


589-6 769-9 


0-2 


0-5 


0-5 to 2-0 


1-5 to 6-0 


330-2 I ,ni..A 
330-3 J ^^^^ 


0-2 


0-1 


100 to 400 


200 to 800 



Note — By rotation of burner on 589 and 589*6 nm for sodium and on 766*5 and 
769*9 nm for potassium, measurements can also be taken for 20 to 50 tJtg/ml. 

♦This can be changed as per the instrument specification. 

6. REAGENTS 

%A Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — see IS : 265-1976*. 
€.2 Concentrated Nitric Acid — see IS : 264-1976t. 
%3 Hydrofluoric Acid 

6.4 Sodium Chloride 

6.5 Potassium Chloride 

6.6 Cesium Chloride 

7. PROCEDURE 

7,1 Standard Sodium Solution — Weigh exactly 2*542 2 g of sodium 
chloride, previously dried at 120°G, Transfer the salt with water to 
250-ml beaker. Dissolve in 100 ml of water and add 10 ml of hydro- 
chloric acid. Transfer the solution to 1 -litre volumetric flask and make 
up the volume,, mix well and store in polyethylene bottle. This solution 
contains 1 mg/ml of sodium. For preparing standard solution, dilute 
the above stock solution taking appropriate aliquot. Add 0*4 g of 
potassium chloride per 100 ml to have 2 000 ppm of potassium to suppress 
ionization while working in air-acetylene flame. 



•Specification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ). 
fSpecificatiou for nitric acid ( second revision ). 



IS : 10614 - 1983 

7.2 Standard Potassium Solution — Weigh exactly 1*906 8 g of 
potassium chloride dried at 400^*0 and cooled to room temperature. 
Transfer to 250 ml beaker, dissolve in 100 ml of water and add 10 ml of 
hydrochloric acid. Transfer to 1 -litre volumetric flask and make up to 
the mark and store in polyethylene bottle. This solution contains 1 mg/ 
ml of potassium. Take aliquot of this solution and accordingly add 
about 0*13 g of cesium chloride per 100 ml volume, make up solution to 
have about 1 000 ppm of cesium in the working solution, if the measure- 
ments are taken in air-acetylene flame. In air-propane flame only further 
dilution are required without cesium chloride addition. 

Note — Sodium chloride/sodium nitrate may also be used for cesium chloride. 

7*3 Preparation of Sample Solution 

7.3.0 There can be numerous matrices in which sodium and potassium 
may be present and to bring these metals in solution, the method may 
vary depending on the nature of matrix. Some of the common matrices 
wherein sodium and potassium are generally determined have been 
included in this standard. 

7.3.1 Minerals — Powder the material so that it passes through 150 
micrometer IS sieve. Weigh accurately a suitable mass of the material 
( dried at 1 ICC and cooled ) in a iOO-ml beaker. Add 10 ml of hydro- 
chloric acid, 5 ml of nitric acid and 10 ml of water. Boil till the 
reaction is completed. Evaporate to syrupy consistency. Extract the 
residue with hydrochloric acid ( 2 percent ) and filter if necessary. 
Transfer the filtrate to 100-ml volumetric flask. Treat the residue, if 
any, on the filter paper as given in 7.3.2. 

7.3.2 Silicate — Decompose the silicate ( 0'2 g ) with 5 ml hydrofluoric 
acid and 10 ml of concentrated nitric acid in a platinum dish or Teflon 
beaker and evaporate just to dryness or syrupy consistency. Repeat this 
process, if necessary^ for complete decomposition. Add 10 ml of concen- 
trated nitric acid and evaporate again. Transfer to 100 ml beaker and 
add 10 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid and evaporate again to 
syrupy consistency. Take in hydrochloric acid ( 1 percent ) solution, boil 
and filter to make up 100 ml. 

7.3.3 Organics — Incinerate the sample at 400 to 450°C till the carbon 
decomposes, then proceed as given in 7.3.2. 

7.3.4 Effluents and Sewages — Take 100 ml of sample in a beaker and 
add 5 ml of concentrated nitric acid and evaporate to dryness. Repeat 
this operation once more adding concentrated nitric acid. Dissolve the 
residue in minimum volume of concentrated hydrochloric acid. Boil to 
dissolve, dilute to 50 ml with water, filter and make up to 100 ml, if 
necessary, potassium chloride or cesium chloride may be added accord- 
ingly. 



IS : 10614 - 1983 

7.3.5 Water — If the water is clear, just acidify with hydrochloric acid 
and feed directly into the flame ( if necessary cesium chloride or potas- 
sium chloride may be added to suppress ionization of potassium and 
sodium respectively in air-acetylene flame ) otherwise filter and proceed 
in the same manner. 

7.4 Determination — Aspirate the appropriate solution to the flame 
along with the required standard solution and noie the absorption. Take 
at least four standards in the range in which sample absorption comes. 
Plot the graph and find out the exact concentration of the elements in the 
solution. 

Note — Whenever, a direct reading instrument ( concentration in ^-g/ml ) is used, 
a blank containing the matrix, along with blank containing known standard of the 
element to be determined is also aspirated and after standardizations, the test 'solution 
may be aspirated and concentration directly read out in tJ5.g/ml, 

B. CALCULATION 

o^ c J. . u ^ X 7 100 

«.l Sodium or potassium, percent by mass = ^^ — X -j-f^ 



where 



e «= concentration of sodium or potassium in /ttg/ml in the 
final solution, 

V = volume in ml of the final solution, and 

M = mass in g of the material in the final solution. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) 
Base Units 



Qp-ANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








QUAKTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








QpANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s^ 


Energy 


joule 


J 


I J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W- IJ/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.S 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m2 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-i> 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = 1 N/m^ 



