**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13567 (1992) : Determination of Water in Insulating 
Liquids and in Oil-impregnated Paper and Pressboard by 
Automatic Coulometric Karl Fischer Titration - Method of 
Test [ETD 3: Fluids for Electrotechnical Applications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^yj i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i %^sfi^^^>9i^: 



^^CVVVfa^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13567 :193? 
( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

DETERMINATION OF WATER IN 
INSULATING LIQUIDS AND IN OIL- 
IMPREGNATED PAPER AND PRESSBOARD 

BY AUTOMATIC COULOMETRIC KARL 
FISCHER TITRATION — METHOD OF TEST 



UDC 621-315-615 + 621-315-64/65 : 543-812 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1992 Price Group 4 



Fluids for Electrotechnical Applications Sectional Committee, ETD 03 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Fluids for Electrotechnical Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

The test method specified in this standard is a new method, increasingly being used to deter- 
mine water content in insulating liquids. 

This standard has been prepared adopting IEC Document IEC 10 ( Secretariat ) 299 'Determina- 
tion of Water in Insulating Liquids and in Oil-Impregnated Paper and Pressboard by Automatic 
Coulometric Karl Fischer Titration' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission 
( IEC ). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 'Rules for rounding off" numerical values (revised)'. The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 

specified value in this standard. 



IS 13567 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



DETERMINATION OF WATER IN 
INSULATING LIQUIDS AND IN OIL- 
IMPREGNATED PAPER AND PRESSBOARD 

BY AUTOMATIC COULOMETRIC KARL 
FISCHER TITRATION — METHOD OF TEST 



SECTION 1 DIRECT TITRATION 

FOR LIQUIDS OF VISCOSITY 
LESS THAN 100 mm 2 /s AT 40°C 

1 SCOPE 

1.1 This Standard describes a method for 
the determination of water in unused or 
used insulating liquids with coulometrically 
generated Karl Fischer reagent. The method 
is applicable to water concentrations above 

2 mg kg 1 in liquids having viscosity less than 
100 mtf/s at 40°C. The precision data given 
in 11 have been derived for hydrocarbon and 
ester oils as indicated in 11. 

For liquids of viscosity higher than this value, 
the preferred method is the high temperature 
stripping method of Part 2. However, such 
liquids may also be analysed by the methods of 
this standard after dilution with a suitable 
solvent. The precision data of 11 will not be 
valid for this modified procedure*. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian Standards are neces- 
sary adjuncts to this standard: 



IS No. 
335 : 1992 

6855 : 1973 

3 CHEMISTRY 



Title 



oils 



New mineral insulating 
(fourth revision ) 

Method of sampling for liquid 
dielectrics 



3.1 The reactions occurring in a Karl Fisher 
titration are known to be complex, but are 
essentially of water with iodine, sulphur 



♦Precision for a dilution procedure will be affected 
by the degree of dilution, which is dependent on 
the water content of the sample, and the water 
content and viscosity of the chosen solvent. 



dioxide, an organic base and an alcohol in an 
organic solvent. The original Karl Fischer 
reagent used pyridine and methanol, and the 
reactions may be expressed as: 



H a O + 1 2 + S0 2 + 3C 5 H 5 N^2C 5 H 5 N.HI + 



C 5 H 5 N.SOo+CELOH 



C 5 H 5 N.S0 3 
C 5 H 5 NH.S0 4 .CH 3 



(1) 
(2) 



Other base-alcohol combinations are possible 
and may be necessary for titrations on some 
insulating liquids. 

In couiometric Karl Fischer titration the sample 
is mixed with a base/alcohol solution iodide 
ion and sulphur dioxide. Iodine is generated 
electrolytically and reacts with water in a 
similar way to that shown in reactions (1) 
and (2). 

Iodine is generated in proportion to the quan- 
tity of electricity according to Faraday's 
law, as shown by the following reactions: 



21" 



2e^L 



(3) 



One mole of iodine reacts with one mole of 
water stoichiometrically as shown in reactions 
(1) so that 1 mg of water is equivalent to 
10*72 C. Based on this principle it is possible 
to determine the amount of water directly from 
the quantity of electricity ( number of 
coulombs ) required for the electrolysis. 

4 APPARATUS 

4.1 Principle of Operation 

Iodine generated by the electrolysis, as shown 
in reaction (3), reacts with the water in a 
similar way to the Karl Fischer reactions (1) 
and (2). The end point of the reaction is 
detected by a pair of platinum electrodes 
immersed in the anodic solution. At the end 
of the titration, excess iodine depolarises the 



IS 13567 : 1992 



dual platinum electrodes, giving a change in 
the current/voltage ratio which is used to 
activate the end-point indicator and to stop 
the current integrator. 

The current integrator integrates the current 
consumed during the electrolysis, calculates the 
water equivalent according to Faraday's law, 
and finally displays it in micrograms of water. 

4.2 Description of the Apparatus 

The following description of one suitable form 
of apparatus is given for illustrative purposes. 

The titration vessel has typically the configu- 
ration of an electrolysis cell with two compart- 
ments connected by a porous diaphragm. The 
anodic compartment contains a mixture of 
reagent-solvent and sample ( anodic solution ) 
the catholic compartment ( generator assem- 
bly ) a mixture of reagent and solvent ( catho- 
dic solution ). On both sides of the porous 
diaphragm are located the electrolysis 
electrodes. 

The black diagram shown in Fig. 1 illustrates 
the apparatus and includes the following 
components. 

4.2.1 Titration Vessel Assembly 

An example of a suitable titration vessel 
assembly is shown in Fig. 2. However, the 
changes in instrument technology are such 
that radically different designs may become 
available which comply with the technical 
requirements of this Standard. The exempli- 
fied apparatus consists of : 

— Flanged glass reaction vessel (a) with 
sample injection port (b) and drain cock (c). 

— Polytetrafluoroethylene lid (d), flanged to 
match the titration vessel, with three holes 
to receive the electrodes and drying tube. 

— Generator assembly ( combined electrolysis 
cell ) (e) consisting of a glass tube closed at 
its lower end by a diaphragm and equipped 
with platinum electrodes on each side of the 
diaphragm. 

NOTE — The diaphragm may consist of ion ex- 
change membrane, fritted disc, ceramic filter or 
other system to prevent diffusion of both solutions, 
while allowing enough current for electrolysis. 

— Detector electrodes : dual platinum electro- 
des for measurement of potential or current (f). 

— Polytetrafluoroethylene coated stirrer 
bar (g). 



— Drying tubes (h) to protect the titration 
vessel and the generator assembly from atmo- 
spheric moisture. 

— Silicone rubber septa to seal the injection 
port. It is recommended that crosscuts should 
be made in the septa before use, to enable 
blunt, square-ended needles to be used for 
sample injection ( see 5.5 ). Septa should be 
replaced as required to prevent air leakage as 
indicated by instrument drift. 

4.2.2 Detection Circuit 

D.C. constant voltage or a.c. constant current 
is supplied to the detector electrodes ( dual 
platinum measuring electrodes ) so that the 
end point may be detected from the change of 
the polarised current or voltage. 

4.2.3 Current Regulator Circuit 

This circuit controls the electrolysis according 
to the signal from the detector circuit. 

4.2.4 D.C. Power Supply for Electrolysis 

4.2.5 Endpoint Indicator 

This indicates when the end point has been 
reached. 

4.2.6 Current Integrator 

This measures the quantity of electricity con- 
sumed by the electrolysis cell during the 
titration, then calculates and displays the 



u? 



i i 



-m- 



Gj 



m 



m 



1 Titration cell assembly 

2 Detection circuit 

3 Current regulator circuit 

4 D.C. Power circuit ( electrolysis ) 

5 End point displayer 

6 Current integrator 

7 Electromagnetic stirrer 

Fig. 1 Block Diagram of Automatic 
Thrator 



IS 13567 : 1992 



quantity of water, in micrograms, correspond- 
ing to it*. 

4.2.7 Electromagnetic Stirrer 

An electromagnetic stirrer, capable of main- 
taining a constant speed sufficient to ensure 
adequate dispersion. ( The content of the 
titration vessel will not in general be a single 
phase, since most insulating liquids are not 
completely miscible with the reagent liquids. ) 

5 REAGENTS AND AUXILIARY MATERIALS 

WARNING ! Certain reagents may be detri- 
mental to health and must be handled with 
proper care. 

5.1 Reagents 

Prepared reagents are commercially available, 
but care is needed that the reagent is suitable 
for the particular type of instrument used and 
the insulating liquid under test. Interfering 
reactions may take place between methanol 
based reagents and some silicone compounds. 
In addition, similar reactions may take place 
with aldehydes, some ketones, and conjugated 
unsaturated organic acids, which may be 
present in oils as degradation products or 
contaminants. In these cases, reagents not 
based on methanol are recommended. 

Some insulating liquids may require the use 
of additional or alternative solvents. 

5.2 Desiccant, for example self indicating silica 
gel 

5.3 Lubricant Grease 

Polytetrafiuoroethylene based or fluorinated 
hydrocarbon types. Commercially supplied 
greases to this description have been found 
satisfactory. 

5.4 Glass Syringes for Sample Measurement and 
Introduction 

Five ml syringes with needles of suitable length 
and diameterf. Blunt, square ended needles 
are preferred, in order to minimise damage to 
the septa. 

6 PREPARATION OF THE APPARATUS 

Prepare and assemble the apparatus, install 
the reagents and carry out the stabilisation 



procedure in accordance 
rer's instructions. 



with the manufactu- 



7 SAMPLING METHODS 

In general, sampling methods are as in 
IS 6855 : 1973 with following additional 
recommendations and requirements. 

7.1 Samples 

Although the method is applicable to the 
analysis of water in any oil sample, the tacking 
of 'composite' or 'average' samples is not 
recommended. If samples intended for any 
other test procedure are used for water analysis, 
the precision statement of 11 will not be valid, 
and the results obtained may not be adequately 
reliable. 

7.2 Sample Containers 

7.2.1 General Method 

Where it is necessary for samples to be taken 
for transportation between the location of the 
equipment and the laboratory, the sample 
containers shall conform to the following 
specification: 

The samples shall be contained in clean amber 
coloured glass bottles of nominal capacity 
500 ml, having a body height/diameter ratio of 
not more than 2-0*. 

Sample bottles shall be dried by heating in an 
oven for 16-24 hours at 115°C±5°C. While 
hot, the air content of each bottle shall be 
displaced by dry nitrogen obtained from a gas 
cylinder at internal pressure greater than 25 
bar, and the bottle capped immediately. After 
cooling to room temperature, the nitrogen 
flushing procedure shall be repeated and the 
bottle re- sealed. 

7.2.2 Samples for Immediate Analysis 

Samples for immediate analysis may be taken 
directly into dried syringes. The syringes 
and needles shall be dismantled, dried for at 
least 8 hours at 115°C ± 3°C, cooled in a desic- 
cator with anhydrous silica gel for a minimum 
of 2 hours, and kept in the desiccator until 
required. Before use, the syringe and needle 
shall be assembled, filled with the oil under 
test, which is then discharged to waste, and 
refilled. 



♦Some instruments have built-in calculation facilities, 
and display the water concentration for a specific 
sample siz^. 

fNeedles of length 100 mm and bore 1 mm have been 
found satisfactory for general use. 



* The procedure for drying containers has been found 
satisfactory for this size and shape of glass bottle. 
Bottles differing from this will have different sur- 
face/volume ratios and may give rise to unaccept- 
able errors through pickup of water from or by the 
container. 



IS 13567 : 1992 



7.3 Sampling Procedures 

If possible, the sample should be collected 
from a sampling point fitted with an adjustable 
valve. The flow shall not be changed during 
the sampling procedure. 

Each sample bottle shall be completely filled 
and shall be sealed by means of a screw cap 
with a conical polyolefine insert. After fill- 
ing, the cap shall be secured by turning with 
gentle finger pressure only. 

If a sampling point is not available, samples 
may be collected using a clean sampling device 
such as one of those described in IS 6855 : 1973, 
other than those constructed of aluminium. 
The device chosen shall be such that filling of 
the sample bottle can be achieved rapidly 
without introducing errors through excessive 
exposure to air during the transfer. 

Sampling devices shall, if possible be dried 
in the same way as bottles. Devices which 
are too large for oven drying shall be dried 
after cleaning by rinsing successively with 
acetone and hexane followed by dry nitrogen 
( as above, see 7.2 ) to evaporate traces of 
solvent. 

7.4 Storage 

Sample for water analysis shall at no time be 
exposed to direct sunlight. Between the time 
of collection and analysis, the samples should 
be kept in the dark, and the time beween 
collection and analysis shall not in any case be 
greater than 7 days. 

8 PROCEDURE 

The optimum sample size has been found to be 
5 ml for the insulating liquids described in 11, 
and for all water contents between 2 and 
100 mg kg" 1 . For water contents outside this 
range, it may be necessary to vary the sample 
size or to dilute with a suitable solvent. In 
this case, the precision statements of 11 may 
not apply. 

8.1 Clean and dry in a well-ventilated oven 
115 C C ± 5C, 5 ml glass syringes and needles 
of a suitable size. Allow them to cool in a 
desiccator ( see 7.2.2 ). 

8.2 Fill a syringe with the insulating liquid, 
keeping the tip of the needle well below the 
surface of the liquid. Re-close the glass bottle 
immediately. Holding the syringe vertically 
with the needle uppermost, discharge all air 
bubbles. Discharge the contents of the 
syringe, which are discarded. Repeat this 
procedure. 



8.3 Refill the syringe, and align the piston 
indicator mark with the 5 ml mark on the 
barrel. 

8.4 Immediately inject the contents of the 
syringe through the needle inserted through 
the cross-cut septum. The tip of the needle 
shall not be allowed to touch the surface of 
the liquid. Immediately start the electrolysis. 

8.5 Read out the quantity of water titrated 
( expressed in fig ) from the display when the 
titration is completed. 

8.6 Carry out a duplicate determination by 
repeating steps 8.3 to 8.5. 

8.7 Calculate the mean, m, of 
determination values. 



the duplicate 



8.8 After several determinations, a considera- 
ble quantity of insulating liquid may have 
accumulated. Remove the excess of liquid 
in accordance with the manufacturer's instruc- 
tions, which should also be followed in respect 
of the relative levels of the anode and cathode 
reagents, after removal of excess insulating 
liquid, it may be necessary to repeat the pro- 
cedure for stabilisation of the equipment 
( see 6 ). 

8.9 Make duplicate determinations of the 
sample mass of the oil by filling the syringe 
as in 8.3 and weighing to the nearest 5 mg 
before and after discharging the oil. Record 
to the nearest 0*01 g the mean mass M. 

9 CALCULATION OF THE RESULT 

Water content = m/M mg kg" 1 
where 

m = mean of displayed readings ( ^g of 

water ). 
M = mean mass in grams of insulating 
liquid discharged from 5 ml mark of 
syringe. 

10 REPORT 

The water content of the insulating liquid 
sample is the mean of the duplicate determina- 
tions, expressed to the nearest integer in 
mg kg l 

11 PRECISION 

11.1 Repeatability 

Duplicate results carried out by one operator 
should be considered suspect at ihe 95% con- 
fidence level if they diifer by more than r, 
where 

r = 0-4 + 0-019 c ( c = mean of results in 
mg kg" 1 ) 



IS 13567 : 1992 



Each result is the mean of 
( see 9 ). 

11.2 Reproducibility 



two determinations 



Desiccants for carrier gas: One silica gel column 
plus two phosphorus pentoxide columns. 



When two laboratories test different samples 
of the same insulating liquid, each shall report 
a result which is the mean of two deter- 
minations. 

The two means should be considered suspect 
at the 95% confidence level if they differ by 
more than R, where 



R = 1-7 + 0-051 c ( c 
in mg kg" 1 ). 



mean of results 



SECTION 2 EVAPORATIVE STRIPPING 

METHOD FOR LIQUIDS OF VISCOSITY 

GREATER THAN 100 mm 2 /s AT 40°C 

12 SCOPE 

This standard describes a method for the 
determination of water in unused or used high 
viscosity insulating liquids with coulometrically 
generated Karl Fischer reagent. This method 
is mainly applicable to water CDncentration 
above 2 mg kg~ l in liquids having viscosity 
greater than 100 mm 2 s -1 at 40°C. However, 
this method has also been found adequate for 
the low viscosity liquids, as demonstrated in 
Annex A. 

13 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

A known amount of the insulating liquid is 
heated in an oven located next to the Karl 
Fischer apparatus; the water evolved is quanti- 
tatively transferred into the titration vessel 
by a stream of dry nitrogen gas, where coulo- 
metric titration is effected. 

14 APPARATUS 

The block diagram of the apparatus is illustra- 
ted in Fig. 3. 

Titrator : Automatic coulometric Karl Fischer 
( seeFlg. 2 ). 

Evaporator : Glass vessel, 100 ml capacity; N 2 
blowing i.i tube, 1*25 mm inside diameter 
( see Fig. 4 ). 

Heater : Clear, transparent electro-conductive 
glass heater. 

Temperature controller : Automatic control, 
accuracy ± 2°C . 

Carrier gas : Nitrogen gas ( commercial grade 
less than 10 /u.1/1 water ). 




a) Titration vessel ( anodic compartment ) 

b) Sample injection plug 

c) Drain cock 

d) Polytetrafluoroethylene lid 

e) Generator assembly ( cathodic compartment ) 

f) Duel platinum for potential measurement electrodes 

g) Polytetrafluoroethylene coated stirring bar 
h) Drying tubes 

Fig. 2 Suitable Titration Vessel Assembly 




1 Flowmeter 

2 Silica Gel Drying Tubes 

3 Phosphorus Pentoxide Drying Tube 

4 Phosphorus Pentoxide Drying Tube 

5 Evaporator Glass Vessel 

6 Temperature Controller 

7 Titration Cell 

8 Control Unit 

Fig. 3 Block Diagram of Automatic 
Titrator and Evaporative Stripping Unit 



IS 13567 : 1992 



* ^\I V 




T Nitrogen tnlet Tube 

2 Thermocouple 

3 Sample Injection Plug 

4 Nitrogen -f Evaporated Water Outlet Tube 

5 Heater 

6 Drain Cock 

Fig. 4 Evaporator Glass Vessel with 
Heater 



15 PROCEDURE 

15.1 Operate the Karl Fischer titrator as per 
procedures specified in Section 1. 

15.2 Inject a sufficient volume ( approximately 
10 ml ) of base oil into the evaporator vessel 
via the septum of the injection plug. This 
base oil may be the insulating liquid to be 
tested or any other miscible oil. The purpose 
of this initial base oil is to immerse the tip of 
nitrogen inlet tube to permit bubbling of the 
gas. Purge the whole system with dry nitro- 
gen gas at a flow rate of 200 ml/minute, to 
thoroughly dry the base oil. Set temperature 
of the evaporator unit to 130°C ± 5°C. Turn 
to titration switch on. 

15.3 Allow temperature to stabilize to set 
value ( approximately 15 minutes ). Continue 
to titrate to end point. Ignore this reading. 

15.4 Run two blanks of 10 minutes each on 
this initial base oil by following steps 15.6 
and 15.7 of the procedure. If the two blanks 
are within 5 fig of water, take the average blank 
value ( m b ), if the two blanks differ by more 
than 5fxg of water, further drying of the base 
oil may be needed. 

15.5 Inject a suitable quantity of the insula- 
ting liquid ( M ) into the evaporator vessel 



using a syringe ( Minimum needle size = 2 
mm inside diameter ). Weigh the syringe 
before and after liquid injection to obtain the 
accurate mass of sample. Use a 10 g sample 
for water contents greater than 10 mg/kg and 
a 20 ± 5 g sample for water contents less than 
10 mg/kg. 

15.6 Turn off titration switch on main unit for 
a 10 minute period to allow moisture released 
in the evaporator to accumulate in the titra- 
tion cell. 

15.7 After 10 minutes, turn on titration 
switch and allow to titrate to end point. 

15.8 Read the quantity of water titrated ( m ) 
on the Karl Fischer apparatus. 

NOTE — When the water contents are higher than 
50 mg kg- 1 and/or the mass of sample is 20 g, there 
is possibility that the evaporation of water is not 
enough during the defined time. In such a case* 
the perfect evaporation of water by repeating the 
procedures of 15.6 to 15.7 is recommended. 

15.9 For most insulating liquids, another blank 
determination should now be made by setting 
titration switch to off for 10 minutes. If the 
value determined is close to the original 
blank value m b (that is, within 5 jug ) no 
further titration is needed. 

16 CALCULATION OF WATER CONTENTS 

E ( m - m b ) 



Water content = 



M 



-mg/kg 



where 

m = reading on main display ( fig ) 

m b == blank reading ( ^g ) 

M = mass of insulating liquid tested ( g ) 

17 CARRY OUT A DUPLICATE 
DETERMINATION 

18 REPORT 

The water content of the insulation liquid 
sample is expressed as the average of duplicate 
determinations to the nearest integer mg/kg. 

19 PRECISION 
19.1 Repeatability 

Duplicate determinations carried out by one 
operator should be considered suspect at the 
95% confidence level if they differ by more than 
0-60 v/Xm mg/kg ( where X m is the average 
of the duplicate determinations j. 



IS 13567 : 1992 



19.2 Reproducibility 

When two laboratories test different samples 
of the same insulating liquid, each shall pro- 
duce duplicate results and report their 
average. 

The two averages should be considered suspect 
at the 95% confidence level if they differ by 



more than l.SCVXm mg/kg ( where X m is the 
average of the tv/o averages ). 

SECTION 3 DETERMINATION OF WATER 
IN OIL-IMPREGNATED PAPER AND 
PRESSBOARD 

Under Consideration. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 12 ) 

A-l Results of comparative determinations of water in polybutenes using direct injection 
and evaporative stripping. 



Description of Liquid 
Sample 


Viscosity 

40«C 
( mm*/s ) 


Moisture Content, mg/kg 




Direct Injection Method 
X m ( Xt - X s ) 0-6 V>£ 


Evaporative Stripping 
X m ( X x — X a ) 0-6 Sx m 


Polybutene ( 015 ) 
Polybutene (JO) 


700 
10 000 


13 4 2 

Difficult to measure 


14 2 2 
41 4 



X m = Average of duplicate determination X x and X 2 . 



A-2 Auther results of comparative determinations of water in different insulating liquids using 
direct injection and evaporative stripping. 



Description of Liquid 


Viscosity at 40° C 


1 Moisture Contents, mg/kg 


Sample 


( nnn 2 /s ) 


1 






Direct Injection Method 


Evaporative 






1 


Stripping 




12 


X a 


X a 


Mineral Oil 


22 0*5 


19 


Alkylbenzene ( class II ) 


S'5 


18 0*4 


19 


( class III ) 


38 


29 0-6 


28 05 


Alkyldiphenyle thane 


6 


38 0-4 


38 


Alkylnaphthalene 


7 


12 05 


10 


Silicone 


39 


38 0*7 


36 


Polybutene ( class I ) 


52 


14 0*4 


15 0'5 


( class II type 1 ) 


645 


20 6'5 


34 0'5 


( class II type 2 ) 


28 000 


Impossible to measure 


16 



X = Average of n = 5 a — Standard deviation. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard maybe 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. ETD 3 ( 3379 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches ": AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 





Telephone 




C331 01 31 
?33 1 13 75 


C37 84 99, 
$37 86 26, 


37 85 61 
37 86 62 


C 53 38 43, 
1 53 23 84 


53 16 40 


235 02 16, 
235 15 19, 


235 04 42 
235 23 15 



J632 92 95, 632 78 58 
(632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Printed at Print well Printers, Aligarh, India 



