**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 11254 (2009) : Code of Practice for Dispensation of 
Aviation Fuel and Allied Products [PCD 3: Petroleum, 
Lubricants and their Related Products] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 11254 : 1999 

WY^ft^ HH0 ( Reaffirmed 2004 ; 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DISPENSATION OF 
AVIATION FUEL AND ALLIED PRODUCTS 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 73,160.20 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



December 1999 Price Group 4 



Petroleum Products Sectional Committee, PCD 3 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Petroleum Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal ^nd Related 
Products Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1984. The present revision has been taken up to update it in tune with 
international practice. In this version (first revision) fuelling procedure, switch refuelling, defuelling procedure, 
fuel spill-prevention and control data to be obtained prior to the arrival of the aircraft and definitions in more 
terms, etc, have been added. Fuelling place, fuel spillage, etc, have been modified. 

This code has been prepared for the guidance of all the personnel concerned with the fuelling of aircraft. 
The intention is to encourage use of standard procedures which will help to reduce the hazards to minimum 
during the fuelling of aircrafts. 

In the formulation of this code, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

a) Aircraft Fuelling: Fire Prevention and Safety Measures for the Fuelling of Aeroplanes and Helicopters: 
1979 Edition: Civil Aviation Authority, London (UK). 

b) Advisory circular of FAA-AC No. ACl 50/5230-3 dated 8/4/69. 

c) Advisory circular of FAA-AC No. AC150/5230-4 dated 27/8/82. 

d) Aircraft Manual (India), Vol 1, Revised edition up to 31 March 1995. 

e) Aircraft Refuelling, 1971 edition, issued by Burmah Shell (Printed by Tonbridge Printers Ltd, Kent), 
UK. 

f) Refuelling and Quality Control Procedures for Airport Service and Support Operations by NATA. 

g) Aviation Quality Control Manual, 1985, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Bombay, India. 



IS 11254 : 1999 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DISPENSATION OF 
AVIATION FUEL AND ALLIED PRODUCTS 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 ITiis code prescribes the procedures adopted for 
the dispensation of aviation fuel and similar products 
of an aircraft, outside the hangers. These standard 
procedures are recommended to provide guidance to 
the aircraft operators, oil companies and other 
concerned authorities in order to minimise the hazards 
arising out of fuelling operations. 

1.2 Much of this guidance will also apply to fuelling 
of aircraft on water and to cases of maintenance of 
aircraft fuel systems, but supplementary instructions 
may generally be necessary to provide for specific 
cases. 

2 NORMATIVE REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on the standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 



IS No. 
5896 

(Part 1) : 1970 
(Part 2) : 1975 
(Part 3) : 1975 
7667 : 1975 

3 DEFINITIONS 



Title 

Code of practice for selection, 
operation and maintenance of 
special fire fighting appliances: 

Combined foam and crash tender 

Escapes 

Turntable ladders 

Code of practice for handling and 
storage of aviation fuels at 
airfield fueling station 



For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Fuelling shall mean all fuel transfer activities, 
such as fuelling, defuelling, and draining of aircraft 
fuel tanks come the aircraft orientation on wheels. 



3.2 Fuelling Zone or Precautionary Area — is 

regarded as the area extended 6 metres radially from 
the aircraft fuelling point, venting point and fuelling 
equipment in case of straight kerosine (ATF) and 
15 metres in case of gasoline or wide cut fuels. 

3.3 Danger Zone — is regarded as the area within 
the largest polygon obtainable by joining points 
3 metres away from the wings and the fuelling vehicle. 

3.4 Hydrant Vehicle — means a vehicle equipped 
with facilities to transfer fuel between an aircraft fuel 
hydrant and an aircraft. 

3.5 Fueller — means a tank vehicle (tank truck, 
tank fuel trailer, tank semitrailer) designed for and 
employed in the transportation and transfer of fuel 
into or from an aircraft. 

3.6 Apron — means an area or position at an aiiport 
used for the fuel servicing of aircraft. 

3.7 Airport Fuelling System — means an 
arrangement of aviation fuel storage tanks, pumps, 
piping and associated equipment such as filters, water 
separators, hydrants, cabinets and pits installed at an 
aiiport designed to service aircraft at fixed positions. 

3.8 Deadman Control — means a device which 
requires a positive continuing action of an operator 
to allow the flow of fuel. 

3.9 Hydrant — means an outlet in an aiiport fuelling 
system designed to permit the transfer of fuel to a 
hydrant vehicle or a tank vehicle after the matching 
fuel connection on the dispensing equipment is 
properly attached. 

3.10 Switch Fuelling — denotes the practice where 
fuels having a flash point of less than 38°C are mixed 
with fuels having a flash point above 38°C either by 
addition of the higher flash fuel to the lower flash 
fuel or vice versa. 

4 GENERAL 

4.1 The aviation fuel dispensation equipment shall 
conform to the relevant Indian Standard specifications 
or any other approved standards agreed to betwe*" 
the oil company and the aircraft operator. '^' ,, 



1 



IS 11254 : 1999 

and other products d^ivered by the oil companies 
shall be of a quality already agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

4.2 All the statutory rules regarding trani^rtation, 
storage and handling of aviation fuels and similar 
products (see IS 7667) and for iUumination of the 
fuelling zone as agreed by an apprq>riate authority 
(DGCA) shall be followed by the concerned personnel. 

4.3 No leaking or defective fuelling equipment shall 
be used. 

5 SUPERVISION OF FUELLING 

The fuelling of an aircraft shall be done imder the 
supervision of an approved aircraft operator (referred 
to as Fuelling Operator) (see edso 17.2) imd also 
undo" an approved person fixmi the oil company. The 
fiielling operator shall ensure that the fuelling of an 
aircraft is carried out in accordance with the 
prescribed manner, following the conditions laid 
down by the aircraft manufacturer. The approved 
persoimel shall not move from the place of fuelling 
leaving the aircraft and fuelling vehicles unattended. 

6 FUELLING CONDITIONS 

The aircraft operator shall furnish written instructions 
to the fuelling company regarding the correct 
procedure of fiielling and precautions to be taken for 
particular types til aircraft. These instructions shall 
include the fuelling pressure, rate q£ delivery, ete. 
Special precautions such as in the case of switch 
refuellii^ (see 18) shall also be iaUm^^ to the oil 
conq>any in a^ance. All special conditions and 
requirements of aircraft mainufacturers during Uieir 
servicing and fuelling shall be followed by all 
concerned. 

7 FUELLING PLACE 

7.1 The refuelling aS an micraft shall be done in an 
open place as aiq)roved by the aerodrome or other 
concerned authorities. As a general guide the 
following precautions shall be observed: 

a) Fuelling places shall not be less than IS 
metres from any building (aerobridge need 
not be considered as a part of the building). 

b) A "NO SMOKING" notice shall be 
prominently displayed. 

c) Smoking or use of an appliance employing 
naked flame or use of an appliance capable of 
producing a spark or in any other way igniting 
fuel vapoiu-s shall not be permitted within 30 
meters of the aircraft or fuelling equipn^nt. 

d) Aircraft engines shall not be started or turned 
and ignition switches be placed in the "OFF' 
position. 



e) Aircraft electrical radar and radio systems 
shall not be operated and the switches relating 
thereto shall remain in the "OFF' position. 
Provided that this clause shall not apply to 
electrical switches controlling the following 
circuits: 

i) Power and light essential for fuelling 
operations; 

ii) Minimum amount of cabin lighting; and 

iii) Steady parking lights. Paiking Ught 
switches shall not be operated during 
fuelling operations. 

7.2 The use of ground power supply units, air- 
OMiditidiung units, tractors and similar equipment 
shall be permissible subject to compliance with the 
following conditions: 

a) Flexible training cables suitable for use in 
hazardous areas shall be used. 

b) They shall be located outside the Danger 
Zone. 

c) The units, including the associated electrical 
equipment, shall be flame-proof and of a type 
approved by the Chief Inq)ector of Explosives, 
otherwise Uiey shall be stationed at a distance 
(£ not less than IS metres, in the case of 
gasoline or wide cut fuels and 6 metres in the 
case of straight Kerosene (ATF), from the 
aircraft and the fuelling vehicle. 

d) They shall n<rt be switched "ON" or "OFF' 
during fiwl transfer. 

7.3 The aircraft shall not be fuelled within 30 metres 
of radar equipment under test or in use in aircraft or 
groimd installations. 

7.4 The refuelling shall be carried out on a level 
surface as for as possible. 

7.5 The fuelling operator shall ensure that there is 
adequate r^traint of tiKe aircraft by checking that the 
brakes are applied and the wheel chocks are placed 
properly before the fuelling operations are started. 

7.6 Unauthorized persons shall not be permitted in the 
fuelling area under any circumstances. 

8 DATA TO BE OBTAINED PRIOR TO 
ARRIVAL OF AIRCRAFT 

The fuelling supervisor should obtain as much 
advance data as possible in order to serviceihe aircraft 
promptfy and efficiently upon arrival. This includes; 

a). Aircraft arrival and departure times. 



IS 11254 : 1999 



b) Estimated quantity and grades of product 
required. 

c) Determine fuelling method (hydrant, refueller, 
overwing, underwing, etc). 

9 APPROACH TO AN AIRCRAFT 

The aircraft should not be approached until it is 
stationary, the main engines have been shut down, 
and it is ready for servicing. Helicopters must not bfc 
approached until blades stop rotating. Consideration 
should be given to the location of the fueller's engine 
and location of the aircraft's fuel vent system. The 
fuelling vehicle should not be positioned where it 
would obstruct aircraft exit and loading areas. The 
equipment driven shall be marshalled in position. 
Similarly withdrawal of reftielling equipment shall 
be done under supervision. The refuelling equipment 
shall never be reversed towards the aircraft. 

10 POSITION OF FUELLING EQUIPMENT 

10.1 The fiielling equipment shall be placed in such 
a way that a clear exit path is maintained all round 
the equipment to and from the aircraft to allow its 
quick removal in case of need. 

10.1.1 In such cases when the fuelling vehicle is 
parked under the aircraft shall be ensured that any 
accidental spillage from the aircraft air vent does not 
fall on the fuelling equipment. 

10.2 The vehicles and equipments shall not be placed 
where they may cause obstruction to the evacuation 
of persons from occupied portions of the aircraft in 
case of emergency. 

11 MANNING OF FUELLING VEHICLES 

Every refuelling vehicle shall be manned by at least 
one competent person. The operation of flie vehicle 
shall be done only by the competent person(s). 
Adequate manpower shall be available to the 
competent person(s) in order to shut off the flow of 
fuel and or manoeuvre/retreat fh^equipment in case 
of an emergency. 

12 FUEL QUANTITY DELIVERY 

The exact quantity of fuel in terms of volume along 
with its break up distribution in various tanks, if 
desired shall be detailed to the oil company 
representative. Hie oil company representative shall 
give a due challan on the quantity of fuel refuelled in 
the aircraft. The density of fuel supplied shall be 
declared on this challan, if so desired. 

13 APPROVAL OF FUEL SAMPLES AND 
STARTING OF FUELLING 

'Fuelling of an aircraft by the oil company shall be 
started only after the fuel samples have been approved 



by the aircraft operatpr and a clearance has been 
given to the oil company to start the fuelling 
operations. 

14 FUELLING PROCEDURES — UNDERWING 

The following procedures are to be followed in 
underwing servrcing from fuellers and hydrant 
vehicles : 

a) Ground and bond fuelling vehicles to ground 
and to aircraft {see li). 

b) Hydrant servicers only: 

i) Open hydrant pit cover (check the product 
grade before connection). 

ii) Place "warning" signs or lights in 
position at hydrant box. 

iii) Remove dust caps from valve in hydrant 
box and from coupler of inlet hose. 

c) Open aircraft fuelling station access door and 
remove dust covers from hose nozzle and 
aircraft valves. 

d) Connect delivery hose nozzle to aircraft 
fuelling point, open nozzle and place 
q}propriate aircraft fuel switch to the "on" 
position. Connect the hose coupler to the 
hydrant valve after checking both valve 
surfaces to be sure fliey are clean and dry, 
then open hydrant coupler and adapter and 
activate fiielling vehicle with deadman control. 

e) Start fuelling-keep alert and- take all 
precautions for safety and be sure not to 
exceed aircraft structural fuel pumping 
pressure. 

i) Continually monitor the underwing fiiel 
gauges and be in a position to quickly 
shut off flow in an emergency. 

ii) Never block a deadman valve in the "on" 
or open position. Under no ch-cumstances 
shall the nozzle be left unattended during 
fuelling. 

f) Never overlook the possibility of an accidental 
fuel spill or leak from the aircraft or the 
fuelling vehicle. 

g) Upon completion of fuelling: 

i) Check fuel quantity dispensed with fuel 
quantity requested. 

ii) Disconnect hydrant coupler and stow 
hoses. 

iii) Disconnect hose nozzle and replace dust 
caps. 



IS 11254 : 1999 



iv) Close fuelling station access door. 

v) Remove ladders or lower platform. 

vi) Remove bond cable from aircraft to 
fuelling vehicle and ground cable from 
ground to fuelling vehicle. 

h) Check the filter/separator sump on fuelling 
vehicle for water, following the fiielling. If 
an unsatisfactory check is found, request an 
airline representative to check aircraft sumps, 
drain any water found and acknowledge that 
aircraft is water free. 

j) Remove fuelling vehicle from aircraft area as 
soon as possible after servicing is completed. 

15 FUELLING PROCEDURES — OVERWING 

In addition to the procedures given for underwing, 
where applicable, the following should also be applied: 

a) Always use suitable ladders and mats to avoid 
damage to aircraft wing. Use extreme care to 
prevent hose or nozzle from damaging deicer 
boot or leading edge of wing. 

b) Set wing mat in place. 

c) Coimect static bonding wire from nozzle to 
receptacle, post or other metal part of plane 
before opening fuel tank cover. 

d) Open tank access, remove nozzle dust cap 
and insert nozzle, keeping constant contact 
between the nozzle and the filler neck while 
fuelling. 

e) Start fuelling — Overwing nozzles should 
not be equipped with "hold open ratchets" 
which will prevent nozzle from being 
unattached during delivery. Make frequent 
visual checks of tank capacity, taking extreme 
care to prevent spillage or overfilling. 

f) Upon completion of delivery, quantity in tank 
should be checked with fuel quantity 
requested. 

g) Replace and secure tank access caps. 
Disconnect nozzle static bond wire. Replace 
nozzle dust cap. 

h) Return hose to fueller reel. 

16 FUELLING WITH PASSENGERS ABOARD 
AND DURING EMBARKATION AND 
DISEMBARKATION 

16.1 To reduce transit time and for security reasons, 
sometimes airlines allow passengers to embark and 
disembark or remain on board during fuelling 
operations. 



16.2 In the case of wide cut turbine fuels are involved 
and/or the fuel does not contain anti-static additive, 
it is advisable to disembark the passengers before 
fuelling. 

16.3 The decision to allow passengers to embark, 
disembark or remain on board diu-ing fuelling is the 
responsibility of the airline and following precautions 
shall be exercised by the airline concerned: 

a) Fixed wing aircraft with a seating capacity of 
less than 20 shall not be permitted to be 
refuelled with passengers on board. 

b) Passengers should be warned that fuelUng will 
take place and that they shall not smoke, operate 
switches or otherwise produce sources of 
ignition. 

c) The 'No smoking' and 'Exit' signs should 
be illuminated. 

d) Provision is made for safe evacuation of 
passengers via at least two of the passenger 
embarkation and disembarkation doors in the 
event of an emergency. A responsible person 
should be positioned at each door in order to 
supervise evacuation of passengers, if needed. 

e) If during fuelling, the presence of fuel vapour 
is detected in the aircraft interior, or any 
other hazard arises, fuelling should be 
stopped. 

f) Groimd servicing activities and work within 
the aircraft should be conducted in such a 
manner that they do not create a hazard or 
obstruct exits. 

g) Access to and egress from the areas where 
aircraft escape chutes may be deployed should 
be kept clean. 

h) When passengers are embarking or 
disembarking during fuelling, their route 
should avoid areas where fuel vapours are likely 
to be present and be under the supervision of 
an airline official. 'No smoking' should 1)e 
enforced strictly during such passenger 
movements. 

17 HELICOPTERS 

17.1 Because of design features of helicopters, 
namely, dose proximity of fuel intake and tanks to 
the passenger compartments, it is recommended that 
passengers should not be allowed to remain in the 
aircraft and be away from the fuelling zone when 
fuelUng is in progress. Engines should not be operated 
when fuelling is in progress. 



IS 11254 : 1999 



17.2 In certain such cases when engines are kept 
running {see also 17.1 and 30.3) for example, severe 
weather and wind conditions experienced on offshore 
oil rig platform when quick turn round or some other 
operational aspect requires engines to be running as 
the fuelling is in progress, the commander of the 
aircraft shall be responsible for the overall direction 
of fuelling operations. 

17.3 Fuelling involving gasoline or wide cut turbine 
fuels not containing antistatic additives shall not be 
carried out when the engines are running. 

17.4 Fuelling involving gasoline or wide cut turbine 
fuels containing antistatic additive shall be carried 
out whilst engines are running only if the exhaust 
system is at higher level than filling port of the 
aircraft or on the opposite side of the aircraft. 

18 SWITCH REFUELLING 

18.1 The resulting fuel air vapours in switch refuelling 
have new and usually broader flammability 
characteristics, thus increasing chances of anignitable 
mixture. In such cases there is an increased risk of 
fire and explosion unless adequate precautions are 
taken to prevent ignition from any source of flammable 
fuel-air vapours in the fuel tank. The following 
procedures are to be followed in case of switch 
refuelling of aviation turbine fuel. 

18.1.1 Aircraft Operators using ATF shall inform the 
fuel vendor before refuelling whenever fuel in the 
tank(s) of a particular aircraft is likely to be a mixture 
of kerosene type fuel and other type, the latter not 
being less than 5 percent. This shall be done in 
writing. 

18.1.2 The fuel vendor shall reduce the refuelling 
rate by 50 percent of the normal refuelling rate 
whenever switch refuelling is to be effected. 
Additionally, the release documents pertaining to the 
particular refuelling shall indicate the words "switch 
refuelling" to indicate that refuelling at the stipulated 
reduced fuel flow rate was carried out. 

18.1.3 The fuel vendors shall obtain an assurance from 
the Foreign Airlines they serve to the effect that the 
Airlines shall inform them whenever switch refuelling 
is to be effected. 

19 DEFUELLING PROCEDURES 

19.1 Defuelling an aircraft may be required for a 
load adjustment or maintenance work. The safety 
procedures are similar to Jjiose used in fuelling and 
the same precautions must be observed. 

19.2 In making a load adjustment, defuelling normally 
follows shortly after the aircraft has been fuelled. 
This may be caused by a change in flight plans or 
aircraft loading. 



19.3 Defuelling for maintenance work will nomially 
require the aircraft tanks to be emptied. 

19.4 It is desirable to defuel into empty vehicles when 
possible, but product removed for load adjustment 
may be defuelled into a refueller equipped for this 
purpose and may be commingle to a fuel of the same 
type to a ratio of up to 10 percent with the contents 
of the vehicle. 

19.5 Defuelled product that is withdrawn under the 
following conditions shall be defuelled into an empty 
refueller and handled as contaminated fuel and not 
returned to any aircraft : 

a) Known to be suspected of being contaminated. 

b) Unknown grade of fuel or mixtures. 

c) Fuel removed due to accident or other unusual 
conditions. 

19.6 Defuelled product shall be held in the defuelling 
unit and returned to either the aircaft from which it 
was removed or to other aircraft of the same 
customer. 

20 FUEL SPILLAGE 

20.1 Fuel spills present an extremely hazardous fire 
potential and should be handled as such. Because of 
the many variables, no two spills will present identical 
hazards, so no set of instructions will apply in every 
case. However, prompt action, good judgment and 
initiative will always be required. 

20.2 If fuel is discovered spilling from fuel service 
equipment or from the aircraft itself, the fuel servicing 
shall be stopped immediately by release of the 
deadman control or by operation of the emergency 
fuel shutoff. Every spill, no matter how small, should 
be reported to the supervisor and the remedial action 
taken. The supervisor should determine if the operations 
in progress can be continued safely or if they should 
be stopped until the nature of the problem is 
determined and corrected. 

20.3 Spill Size 

20.3.1 Any fuel spill presents a potential fire hazard. 
Pint size spills require no emergency action, other 
small spills involving an area from 45 cm to 2 metres 
in any dimension require, as a minimum of 
protection, the posting of a fire guard to maintain a 
restricted area around the spill and to keep out 
unauthorized persons. The fire guard should be 
equipped with atleast one dry chemical or carbon 
dioxide extinguisher. Dry chemical extinguishers are 
well suited to these circumstances and have a much 
greater effective range. 



B 11254 tst999 

20.3.2 Any spill approximately 2 metres in any 
dimension or of a continuing nature is extremely 
hazardous. The airport emergency fire crew should 
be called at once. If an emergency crew is not 
available, airport personnel should mobilize all available 
firefighting equipments as standby protection. The 
equipment and assistance of other fire protection units 
should also be requested. 

20.3.3 If the spill is large, the passengers and crew 
should be directed to evacuate the aircraft. The 
location of the spill, its direction of flow, the wind, 
etc, will determine the least evacuation route. 

20.4 Spill Clean Up 

20.4.1 Small spills should be cleaned up as quickly 
as possible with absoibent cleaning agents, emulsion 
compounds, or rags. The aise of absorbent cleaning 
agents or emulsion compounds are preferred because 
they can be applied with less risk to the cleanup 
crew. Contaminated s^soibents and fasi soaked xags 
act as wicks and should be placed, in metal containers 
with self-closing lids until burned at a safe location 
or otherwise disposed of 

20.4.2 Large spills of gasoline should be blanketed 
with foam. The spill should then be washed away 
with water and any residue allowed to evaporate 
before the area is again used for normal operations. 
These fuels should not be washed down sewers or 
drains unless no alternative is available, since this 
merely moves the hazard to another location. If such 
action must be taken, it should be only on orders 
from the chief of the airport fire department. If the 
spillage should get to the sewers, the sewers should be 
very liberally flushed with water, and operations 
involving ignition sources should be kept away from 
the vicinity of open drains and manholes. All 
recoverable fuel spillage should be disposed of 
properly. 

20.4.3 Kerosene type fiiel does not evaporate quickly 
and hence can be a fire hazard for a prolonged period. 
It should be blanketed with foam if it is feared that 
ignition is probable without this protection. In most 
situations, however, it is better to use an emulsifying 
agent to remove any oily residue from the surface, 
and then flush the mixtiu-e away. 

20.4.4 Every fuel spill should be investigated to 
determine the cause, whether emergency procedures 
were properly carried out, and what corrective 
measure are required. 

21 FUEL SPILLS — PREVENTION AND 
CONTROL 

21.1 Fuel spills are often the result of improper or 
careless operation of fiielling equipment and lack of 



preventive maintenance of the fuelling equipment. 
Therefore, it is imperative that operating personnel 
comply with the company procedures established to 
govern fuelling operations and report any leakage of 
the equipment used during the fuelling operations to/ 
supervisory persoimd. 

21.2 Self-discipline on the part of every man on the 
fuelling crew to prevent fiiel spilling. Operating 
personnel are lequiied to: 

i) wedge the nozzle trigger in an open position. 

ii) Devote fiill attention to the fuelling operation. 

iii) Frequently check the amount of fuel in the 
tank to prevent overfilling. 

iv) Understand the operations of the automatic 
and deadman switches or shutofT valves in 
the aircraft fuel system; precheck or verify 
their operating conditions; and constantly 
monitor their operations when using 
underwing filling procedures. 

v) Stop the flow of fuel immediately upon 
discovering leakage or spillage from the fuel 
servicing equipment. 

vi) Always ensure pump selector valve is in 
"OFF' position prior to changing nozzle from 
over-wing to under-wing or vice versa using 
the quick-disconnect coupling. 

22 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN 
IN THE FUELLING ZONE 

22.1 Within fuelling zone, smoking, the use of naked 
lights or operation of switches on lighting systems 
of other than approved pattern shall be forbidden. 

22.2 Unless fuelling takes place in a designated 'No 
Smoking Area', 'No Smoking' signs shall be 
predominantly displayed not more than 15 metres 
away from the fiielling equipment and aircraft tank 
vents. 

22.3 Persons engaged in fuelling operations shall not 
cany matches or other means of ignition. They shall , 
also not use footwear with exposed iron or steel 
studs, nails and lips. 

22.4 Equipment with all metal wheels or rod capable 
of producing sparks shall not be moved in the iuelhng 
zone while fuelling is in progress. 

22.5 Aircraft borne auxiliary power units (APUs) 
which have an exhaust influx discharging into the 
zone shall be started before filler caps are removed 
or fiielling connections xaade. If an APU has stopped 
for any reason, it shall not be started when the 
fiielling is continuing and there is a risk of fiiel 
vapour ignition. 



22.6 Ground Power Units (GPUs) whenever used shall 
1)e positioned not less than 6 metres from the aircraft 
filling and venting points and the fuelling equipment. 

22.7 Only approved vehicles and equipment shall be 
run in the fuelling zone. These vehicles and 
equipments shall be subjected to regular inspection 
and maintenance to preserve their safety 
characteristics (see also 27). 

22.8 Exhaust of the refuelling vehicle shall not pass 
over the fuelling hose. 

23 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS AGAINST 
STATIC ELECTRICITY DISCHARGE 
BONDING AND EARTHING 

23.1 Efficient bonding between the aircraft and the 
fuel supply source is very much essential for the 
prevention of fire risk due to static electricity discharge 
during fuelling. 

23.2 Before transfer of fuel commences, following 
procedures shall be carried out in respect of bonding 
the fueller and the aircraft. 

23.2.1 Attach a grounding cable from the fuelling 
vehicle to satisfactory ground connect. Ideally, 
earthing should be through apron earthing points 
designed for this purpose. 

23.2.2 Connect a grounding cable from the ground 
to the aircraft fitting, if one is provided, or any 
convenient unpainted metal point on the aircraft: 

23.2.3 Bond the vehicle to the aircraft. Where a 'Y' 
or 'F' cable permanently attached to the fuelling 
vehicle is used to accomplish (23.2.1) ^nd (23.2.2) 
above, a separate bonding cable is not necessary. 

23.2.4 When refuelling from drums, bairels or similar 
equipment is carried out, similar precautions shall be 
taken to bond the pumping equipment, hoze nozzle 
and fuel container. 

23.2.5 Whenever funnels are used, they shall be 
bonded both to nozzle of hose or can and to the 
aircraft. If a chamois leather is used, the metal ring 
around the leather shall be bonded to the fuimel. 

23.2.6 The fuel opening shall not be opened before 
bonding connections are nuide. Similarly, at the end 
of the fuelling operations, first the fuel opening shall 
be closed, fuelling coupling disconnected or the 
fuelling nozzle removed as the case may be and then 
only shall the bonding connections be broken. 

23.2.7 In case of pressure fuelling, metal to metal 
contact between the aircraft filling and the fuelling 
hose coupling shall be ensured. In addition a bonding 
pin or clip from the fuelling hose coupling to the 
aircraft structure near the fuel receptacle may be used 
to provide additional safeguard. 



IS 11254 : 1999 

23.2.8 Whenever wing fuelling is employed the nozzle 
of hose shall be bonded to the aircaft structure before 
the filler cap is removed. 

23.2.9 All cables, clips and plugs used for bonding 
or earthing shall be maintained in proper condition 
and regularly tested fof electrical continuity. 

24 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS AGAINST FIRE 
HAZARD 

24.1 When any part of under carriage assembly has 
become abnormally heated during landing or taxing, 
the aircraft shall not be fuelled until heat has 
dissipated. Fuelling equipment shall not be positioned 
until the fuelling supervisor has satisfied himself that 
there is lu^nsk from heated components. 

24.1.1 In checking for high temperature, care shall 
be taken in approaching the wheels. The wheels shall 
be approached from the fore or aft and never from 
the sides. 

24.2 Fire extinguishers of a suitable type shall be 
readily available before the transfer of fuel begins. 
The straps securing them to the refuelling equipment 
shall be unfastened before the fuelling operations are 
started. Adequate number of trained persons shall be 
readily available to operate these units. 

24.3 The fire extinguishers shall be maintained to 
the standards recommended by their manufacturers 
(see IS 5896). 

24.4 Fuelling crew shall be insteucted in the procedure 
for summoning the aerodrome fire service. 

24.5 Fuelling operation shall cease when a turboprop 
jet aircraft manoeuvres so as to bring the rear jet 
outlets within 50 metres of the fuelling equipment or 
the aircraft fuelling point and vent system 
(see also 26). 

25 SAFETY FROM ELECTRICAL STOBMS/ 
HEAVY RAIN 

25.1 Extreme care shall be exercised while fuelling 
during electrical storms. Fuelling shall be suspended 
during severe lightning disturbances in the vicinity 
of the aerodrome or helipad. 

25.2 Overwing fuelling shall be suspended during 
heavy storm/rains. 

26 HAZARDS FROM ADJACENT AIRCRAFT 
OPERATION 

Before and during fiielling, it shall be ensured that 
Ho hazard arises to the personnel or equipment from 
the efflux from other aircraft or APUs. If the 
hazardous conditions exist, fuelling operation shall 
immediately be suspended until conditions permit 
resumption of fuelling operations {see also 24.5). 



IS 11254 : 1999 



NOTE — It may be noted that the engine efflux of modem 
jet aircraft when taxing could have speeds up to 65 knots 
and a temperature above 50°C even at a distance of 30 
metres from the exhaust point. This temperature may not be 
dangerous from the fire point of view, but the personnel and 
equipment could be effected. 

27 MAINTENANCE OF GROUND SERVICING 
EQUIPMEi^iT USED 

All vehicles, their engines and equipment shall be 
subject to regular inspection and maintenance to 
preserve safety characteristics. The engine, the 
electrical and exhaust system of such vehicles shall 
not make any sparks or flames. Vehicles moving in 
the danger zone may be fitted with spark arrestors 
and flame traps if required by th6 concerned 
authorities. 

28 USE OF PHOTOGRAPHIC FLASH 
EQUIPMENT 

No photographic flash bulbs and electronic flash 
equipments shall be permitted to be used within 
6 metres filling or venting points of an aircraft 
or fuelling equipment. 

29 OPERATION OF RADAR 

Aircraft shall not be fuelled withia 30 metres of radar 
equipment under test or in use in aircraft or groimd 
installations. 

30 SERVICING AND MAINTENANCE OF 
AIRCRAFT DURING FUELLING 

30.1 While fuelling is in progress, servicing, 
maintenance test and repair activities shall be carried 
out subject to the conditions stipulated in 30.2 to 
30.13. Aircraft or other maintenance work which may 
create a source of ignition shall not be carried out 
while fuelling is in progress. 

30.2 All ground equipment, such as platform steps 
shall be clear of the aircraft. Because after fuelling, 
the aircraft has a tendency to settle down due to 
increase in weight and this changed attitude of the 
aircraft may thus cause damage to the aircraft/such 
equipment. 

30.3 The main engines of the aircraft shall not be 
operated (except for helicopter, see 17). Operation of 



APUs and GPUs shall be in accordance with the 
provision of 22.5 and 22.6. 

30.4 Only those switches which are essential in 
carrying out the fiielling or servicing operation\shall 
be operated when fuelling is in progress. 

30.5 Strobe lighting which is^ likely to give spark 
shall not be operated. 

30.6 Alt connections t)etween the ground equipment 
and the aircraft shall be made before the filler caps 
are removed and shall not be broken until the fuelling 
ceases. 

30.7 In case of the use of battery trolleys, the electrical 
circuit shall remain unbroken till the fuelling 
operation is completed. 

30.8 Vehicles operating in the fiielling zone shall not 
pass under or park near the aircraft unless specifically 
required to do so for maintenance or fuelling purposes. 

30.9 Aircraft combustion heaters shall not be used. 

30.10 Only checking and limited maintenance work 
such as the exchange of units shall be carried out on 
radio, radar and electrical equipment. Testing of such 
equipments shall be defened until the fiielling is 
completed. 

30.11 Radio equipment of approved types installed 
on fiielling and servicing equipment may be operated. 

30.12 All hand torches and inspection lamps and 
their cable connections used in the fuelling zone shall 
be of explosion proof intrinsically safe type. 

30.13 Only authorized persons and vehicles shall be 
permitted within the fuelling zone and their number 
shall be kept to the minimum. 

31 TRAINING 

It is essential that all personnel connected with the 
fuelling operations are adequately trained by their 
employers and are supplied with appropriate 
instructions and guidance on safe operating 
procedures. All such personnel shall be fully 
conversant with the operation of fire fighting 
equipment j)rovided for the fiielling operations. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote hamionious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of ^11 its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 3 (1565). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Western 



Branches 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 



{ 



{ 
{ 





{ 


323 76 17 




323 38 41 


337 84 99, 


337 85 61 


337 86 26, 


337 91 20 




{ 


60 38 43 




60 20 25 


235 02 


16, 


235 04 42 


235 15 


19, 


•235 23 15 



832 92 95, 832 78 58 
832 78 91, 832 78 92 



AHMADABAD . BANGALORE . BHOPAL . BHUBANESHWAR . COIMBATORE 
FARIDABAD . GHAZIABAD . GUWAHATI . HYDERABAD . JAIPUR . KANPUR 
LUCKNOW . NAGPUR . PATNA . PUNE . RAJKOT . THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prmtograph, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847 



