**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 


•^■•■^^^■r 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS:  11B12-198& 

(Reaffirmed  2001) 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDED  PRACTICE  FOR 

SAFEGUARDING  AGAINST  WARPAGE  AND 

DISTORTION  OF  HOT  DIP  GALVANIZED 

ARTICLES 


UDC    669  506-5  i  620  197 


©  Copyright  l^BT 

INDIAN    STANDAHDS     INSTITUTION 
MANAK      BHAVAN,      0    ftAI[ADUfi      SUAH      ZAFAR     MARC 

NEW  DEL [11   110002 


IS  :  11812  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDED  PRACTICE  FOR 

SAFEGUARDING  AGAINST  WARPAGE  AND 

DISTORTION  OF  HOT  DIP  GALVANIZED 

ARTICLES 


Hot  Dip  Sprayed  and  Diffusion  Coatings  Sectional  Committee, 

SMDC  28 

Chairman  Representing 

Shbi  V.  R.  SubbamaniaN  Indian  Hot  Dip  Galvanizer's  Association,  New  Delhi 

Alembers 

Shri  V.  K.  Agrawai  Hindustan  Aluminium  Corporation  Ltd,  Renukoot 

Shri  N.  G.  Sharma  (  Alternate) 
Shbi  P.  K.  Banebjeb  National    Tliermal   Power   Corporation   Ltd,    New 

Delhi 
SheiJ.  N.  Bhattachabyya  National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Shri  M.  Y.  Borkbb  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ),  New  Delhi 

Shri  A.  Bhattacharya  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  a.  Ghakrabobty  Usha  Martin  Industries  Ltd,  Ranchi  (  Bihar  ) 

Chemist  &  Metallurgist  Ministry  of  Railways 

Assistant  Chi  mist  & 

^Metallurgist  '  Altirp.dts  ^ 
Chief  Engineer  (  Trans  )  Gujarat  Electricity  Board,  Vadodara 

Executive  Engineer  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  C.  Eery  Steel  Authority  of  India  Ltd  (  Bokaro  Steel  Plant  ), 

Borkaro  Steel  City 
Shri  G.  Ganeshah  Kamani  Engineering  Corporation  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  B.  G.  SohoNi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Bbijlal  Khastriya  Steel    Authority    of    India    Ltd    (  Rourkela    Steel 

Plant  ),  Rourkela 

Shri  J.  N.  Bhamsry  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  M.  L.  Khullar.  The  Tinplate  Co  of  India  Ltd,  Golmuri,  Jamshedpur 

Shri  P.  K.  Banerjbe  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri      Ramesh      Chandra  The      Indian      Steel    and     Wire     Products     Ltd, 

Mahajan  Jamshedpur 

Shri  Darshan  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  D.  Mahbshwari  The  Indian  Tube  Co  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 

Shri  K.  R.  NatabaJaN  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1987 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 
reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 
publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the    said  Act. 


IS  :  11812  -  1986 

(  Continutd  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  S.  Majumdab  Directorate    General    of    Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shbi  p.  G.  MukherJee  Indian  Posts  &  Telegraphs  Department,  Calcutta 

Db  T.  Mukherjee  The  Tata  Iron  &  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 

Shbi  B.  N.  Siugh  \  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  Neblakantan  Zenith  Steel  Pipes  Ltd,  Bombay 

Db  a.  R.  Keskab  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  D.  Paul  Guest,  Keen,  Williams  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  L.  Pugazhanthy  Indian  Lead,  Zinc  Information  Centre,  New  Delhi 

Shbi  S.  N.  Singh  EMC  Steelal  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  PiNaki  Ghosh  {  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  N.  K.  Sinohal  The  Indian  Iron  and  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Burnpur 

Shbi  A.  Sengupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  J.  L.  Soneji  Special  Steel  Limited,  Bombay 

Shbi  M.  R.  Doctob  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  K.  Raghavendban,  Director  General,  ISI  (  Ex-qfficio  Member  ) 

Director  (  Struc  &  Met  ) 

Seeretarji 

Shri  S.  K.  Gupta 
Deputy  Director  (  Metals  ),  ISI 


Hot  Dip  Galvanizing  Subcommittee,  SMDC  28  :  1 

CoriDener 
SiTRi  V.  R..  Sttbbamanian  Indian  Hot  Dip  Galvanizers'  Association.  New  Delhi 

Members 
Shbi  L.  Pugazhbnthy  (  Alternate  to 
Shri  V.  R.  Subramanian  ) 
Shbi  V.  P.  Ananb  EMC  Steelal  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  S.  N.  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  B.  D.  Bali  Hydel  Designs  Directorate,  Chandigarh 

Shbi  J.  S.  Bbdi  Hope's  Metal  Windows  (  India  )  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  A.  K.  Sobti  (  Alternate ) 
DiBECTOB         (  Tbansmission  )       Central  Electricity  Authority,  New  Delhi 
Deputy  Dieectob  {  Tbaks- 
MissiON  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  D.  Dutta  The  Indian  Tube  Co  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 

Shbi  A.  K.  Guha  The  Fort  William  Co  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shbi  S.  Kumab  (  Alternate  ) 
Joint   Dibectob  (  Chem  )  Ministry  of  Railways 

Joint  Director  (  II  )  -  I  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Vijay  Kapoor  Guest,  Keen,  Williams  Ltd,  Howrah 

Shbi  R.  C.  Mahajan  The  Indian  Steel  &  Wire  Products  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 

Shbi  Avtab  Singh  {  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  B.  Mahapatea  Steel    Authority    of   India    Ltd    (  Rourkela    Steel 

Plant),  Rourkela 
Shbi  S.  N.  Sinha  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  en  page  6  ) 


IS  :  11812  -  1986 

Indian  Standard 

RECOMMENDED  PRACTICE  FOR 

SAFEGUARDING  AGAINST  WARPAGE  AND 

DISTORTION*  OF  HOT  DIP  GALVANIZED 

ARTICLES 


0.     FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards 
Institution  on  18  August  1986,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Hot  Dip 
Sprayed  and  Diffusion  Coatings  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved 
by  the  Structural  and  Metals  Division  Council. 

0.2  Warpage  and  distortion  may  occur  in  steel  assemblies  and  sub- 
assemblies fabricated  by  welding  or  riveting.  In  composite  structural 
members,  pipe  joints,  sash,  weldments,  etc,  which  are  to  be  hot  dip 
galvanized  after  fabrication,  are  subjected  to  warpage  and  distortion  due 
to  thermal  stresses  of  heating  and  cooling  incidental  to  the  galvanizing 
operations.  The  above  problem  becomes  more  complicated  when  the 
material  is  to  be  dipped  more  than  once  to  cover  the  entire  surface. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  recommends  the  methods  to  be  adopted  for 
safeguarding  against  warpage  and  distortion  during  hot  dip  galvanizing 
of  steel  assemblies. 

2.  FACTORS  IN  WARPAGE  AND  DISTORTION 

2.1  Warpage  and  distortion  may  be  attributable  to  either  or  both  of  the 
following  factors. 

2.1.1  Thermal  Stresses  Set  Up  in  Material  by  Differential  Expansion  and 
Contraction  During  Heating  Cycle  —  Welded  parts  of  unequal  thicknesses, 
which  heat  and  cool  at  different  rates  is  one  of  the  most  common  causes 
of  this  condition.  A  panel  section  composed  of  light  gauge  sheet  steel 
(  say  1  mm  )  welded  to  6  mm  in  thickness  angle  iron  frame,  is  a  typical 
example.  The  difficulty  is  further  accentuated  by  the  use  of  non-sym- 
metrical sections.     Mild  steel   channels,   for   example,   usually  require 


IS  :  11812  •  1986 

straightening  after  hot  dip  galvanizing  whereas  'I'  beams,  pipes,  etc, 
which  are  symmetrical  about  both  major  axes,  do  not-  Supplementing 
these  effects  are  the  temperature  gradients  set  up  in  the  product  by  pro- 
gressive immersion  in  the  galvanizing  bath  or  quench  tank.  The 
temperature  difference  between  various  parts  on  the  above  are  least 
when  the  entire  article  is  submerged  quickly  and  are  greatest  with  Jafge 
items  where  it  is 'necessary  to  dip  one-half  of  the  article  at  a  tinffe  "to 
complete  coating  coverage.  Channels  and  other  non-symmetrical  sections 
should  be  avoided  for  the  frame  work  of  a  sheet  metal  assembly  that  is 
to  be  hot  dip  galvanized.  Whenever  it  is  possible,  symmetrical  shapes  or 
sections  should  be  used. 

2.1-2  Release  of  Residual  Internal  Stresses  Remaining  from  Fabrication 
Process  —  During  the  fabrication  and  assembly  by  welding  or  rivetingj 
particularly  where  parts  are  clamped  or  otherwise  strained  durih^ 
fabrication  processes,  are  subjected  to  stresses.  These  stressed  -are 
normally  released  at  the  galvanizing  temperature  and  frequently  result 
in  distortion. 

3.  SUGGESTED  PRECAUTIONS  FOR  ASSEMBLY 
3.1  In  Design  and  Fabrication 

3.1.1  There  are  advantages  in  designing  the  members  of  the  size  that 
can  be  accommodated  in  a  single  dip  which  is  guided  by  the  size  of  the 
galvanizing  bath. 

3.1.2  The  members  used  in  an  assembly  should  be  pre-formed  accu- 
rately to  avoid  springing  action  and  force  at  the  time  of  assembly. 

3.1.3  If  possible,  all  welds  should  be  stress  relieved  by  suitable  low 
temperature  heat-treatment  before  galvanizing. 

3.1.4  Parts  used  in  assembly  should  be,  as  far  as  possible,  of  equal  or 
near  equal  thickness. 

3.1.5  Corners  on  articles  such  as  sheet  metal  bins,  pans,  etc,  should  be 
formed  with  a  generous  radius  to  minimize  local  stress  concentration. 

3.1.6  Strengthening  angles  or  stifTeners  should  be  placed  in  position 
and  held  down  to  prevent  material  movement  when  in  contact  with  the 
electrodes  during  welding  operation.  Hence,  these  stiffening  angles  or 
stiffeners  can  take  care  of  distortion.  In  welding  any  intermediate 
lengths  along  one  side  of  a  common  member,  care  should  be  taken  to 
prevent  warpage  of  the  common  member  due  to  application  of  high 
heat  on  the  same  side. 

3.1.7  All  edges  of  tightly  contacting  surfaces  should  be  completely 
sealed  by  welding.  This  will  prevent  the  rusting  of  surfaces  which  are 
so  connected  that  molten  zinc  cannot  circulate  through  crevices  to 
galvanize  the  contacting  surface. 

4 


IS  :  11812  -  1986 

3.1.8  If  the  galvanizing  kettle  is  of  sufficient  size  to  permit  total 
immersion  of  the  assembly  in  one  dip;  riveting  of  fabricated  parts  prior 
to  galvanizing  is  not  recommended  because  contacting  surfaces  will  not 
be  coated  and  rusting  will  occur  due  to  entrapped  pickling  acid. 

1.1.9  If  the  structure  cannot  be  galvanized  in  one  go,  it  is  better  to 
assemble  the  galvanized  sheet  and  galvanized  frame  separately.  Gal- 
vanized rivets  or  aluminium  alloy  rivets  may  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

3.2  Daring  Galvanizing 

3.2.1  The  article  should  be  submerged  as  quickly  as  possible  consistent 
with  safety.  For  this  purpose,  vent  holes  should  be  provided  in  cases 
like  pressure  vessels,  pipe  assemblies,  etc.  Also,  in  case  of  columns 
footiag  stiffeners,  and  gussets  connecting  base  plate  with  the  column 
ihoyld  be  clipped  to  provide  drainage  of  zinc.  This  is  also  applicable 
in  case  of  containers  which  have  a  tendency  to  form  air-pockets  and 
prevent  proper  galvanizing. 

3.2.2  Wherever  possible,  the  article  should  be  dipped  in  such  a  fashion 
as  to  produce  uniform  heating  or  cooling  across  the  sections.  For 
example,  vertical  dipping  of  channel  sections  is  preferable  to  immersing 
them  horizontally  or  at  an  angle. 

4.  GENERAL  FACTORS  IN  DESIGNING  AND  FABRICATION 

4.1  Overlapping  or  Contacting  Surfaces  —  The  edges  of  tightly 
contacting  surfaces  should  be  completely  sealed  by  welding  to  avoid 
rusting  between  the  two  hidden  surfaces.  It  is  important  that  no  pin 
holes  are  left  in  welding  through  which  pickling  acids  or  other  solutions 
can  pass.  Entrapment  of  liquid  in  recesses  may  generate  high  pressure 
of  explosive  forces  at  galvanizing  temperature  and  may  cause  serious 
injury  to  the  personnel. 

4.2  Arc  Welding  —  The  use  of  coated  electrodes  frequently  leave 
welding  residues  which  are  chemically  inert  to  standard  pickling  solu- 
tion. Such  residues  should  be  removed  prior  to  pickling  by  brushing, 
chipping  or  sand  blasting.  Incomplete  removal  can  result  in  bare  spots 
on  the  finished  product.  Where  the  uniform  galvanizing  finish  is  requir- 
ed, steels  of  different  analysis  or  surface  finish  should  not  be  used  in  the 
same  assembly.  This  applies  particularly  to  the  heavily  rusted  or  pitted 
steels  with  new  materials  which  may  result  in  non-uniform  coating  due 
to  different  pickling  times  required  for  the  fresh  material  and  for  heavily 
rusted  material.  Similarly,  machined  surface  should  not  be  welded 
with  hot  rolled  parts.  In  such  instances,  the  entire  piece  should  be  shot 
blasted  prior  or  after  machining  and  then  sent  for  pickling. 

4.3  Pipe  Assemblies  —  For  pipe  assemblies,  such  as  railings,  they 
should  be  provided  with  open  mitre  joints  at  all  times.  Closed  or  blind 
sections  must  not  be  included  under  any  circumstances.  Floor  flanges 
for  steel  pipe  railing  should  also  be  of  steel  and  not  cast  iron. 

5 


I&  i  11812  -  1986 

(  Cmtintied  /ram  page  2  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shbi  S.  Majttmdab  Directorate  General    of  Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 

Dkvelofment  OrricEB  (  HME  )  {  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  S.  Mehta  General  Engineering  Works,  Bharatpur,  Rajasthan 

Shbi  p.  G.  Mukhbbjbb  Posts  &  Telegraphs  Department,  Calcutta 

Shbi  K.  Mitba  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  T.  Mxjkherjeb  Tata  Iron  &  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Jamshedpur 

Shbi  S.  Neelakantak  ,      Zenith  Steel  Pipes  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  B.  A,  Desai  {  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  D.  Parikh  Kamani  Engineering  Corporation  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shbi  A.  Sbxctoita  The  Indian  Iron  &  Steel  Co  Ltd,  Burnpur 

Shbi  J.  L.  Soneji  Special  Steel  Ltd,  Bombay 

Spbi  M.  R.  Doctor  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  K,  M.  Taneja  Directorate  Genaral  of  Supplies  and  Disposals,  New 

Delhi 

Shbi  G.  P.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 


