**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14134 (1994) : Code for hygienic practices for units for 
processing and handling of quick frozen foods [FAD 15: Food 
Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



nrnfkm^m 



1814134:1994 

(Reaffirmed 2005) 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR 

UNITS FOR PROCESSING AND HANDLING 

OF QUICK FROZEN FOODS 



UDC 664-8037-5 : 613 2 : 006 76 



©BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 1994 

Price Group 5 



Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, FAD 45 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council, 

Customers do not have the available knowledge or means of determining the hygienic quality of the food 
they purchase. For this, they rely on the hygienic standards of various industries that prepare and handle 
foods. Unless the factory producing the food is governed by a strict hygienic code in respect of layout, 
plant and personnel, the quality of food produced cannot be considered as safe. 

This code is an adjunct to IS 2491 : 1972 *Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units {first 
revisiony and it covers requirements specific to the units for processing and handling of quick frozen 
foods. 

This code is subject to the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 and the Prevention of Food Adulteration 
Act, 1954 and the Rules framed thereunder and the Fruit Products Order, 1955 amended up to date. 

In the preparation of this code, considerable assistance has been derived from the Recommended 
International Code of Practice for the Processing and Handling of Quick Frozen Foods CAC/RCP 
8-1976 published by Codex Alimeniarius Commission. 

The basic principles of hygiene underlining the technical advice in this code should be applied with 
appropriate modifications to all types of quick fi^ozen foods. 



IS 14134 :19!»4 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR 

UNITS FOR PROCESSING AND HANDLING 

OF QUICK FROZEN FOODS 



IVSCOPE 

1.1 This code prescribes hygienic conditions and 
practices required for establishing and maintaining 
units for processing and handling of quick frozen 
food products. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are neces- 
sary adjuncts to this Standard. 

3 PLANT CONSTRUCTION AND FACILITIES 

3.1 Site 

3.1.1 Units for processing and handling of quick 
frozen foods shall preferably be situated in open, 
clean and healthy surroundings which will not con- 
tribute dangerous micro-organism and foreign 
matter. The units shall be free fjom sources of 
obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or excessive dust. 
There shall not be accumulation of trash, garbage 
or similar waste in the vicinity of the unit. 

3.2 Building 

3.2.1 The structure shall be of permanent nature 
and shall be suitable in size, construction and 
design to facilitate maintenance and hygienic 
operations for processing purposes. It should pro- 
vide sufficient space for housing of equipment and 
storage of fnaterials as is necessary for hygienic 
operations. The material of construction shall be of 
bricks, plaster, cement, concrete, tiles or any other 
equivalent materials which ensure cleanliness. 

3.2.1.1 Construction of the building shall be such 
that it shall be rodentproof, flyproof and birdproof. 

3.2.2 No portion of building shall be used for 
domestic purposes or other types of food prepara- 
tions unless separated by suitable partitions or 
locations or other effective means so as to avoid 
contamination of the product with undesirable 
micro-organisms, odour, chemicals, filth or other 
foreign material. 

3.2.3 Areas where raw materials are received or 
stored should be so separate from areas in which 
final product preparation is conducted as to 
preclude contamination of finished product. Areas 



and compartments used for storage, manufacture 
or handling of edible products should be separate 
and distinct from those used for inedible material. 

3.3 Ventilation and Lighting 

The premises shall be adequately lighted and ven- 
tilated. Light bulbs and fixtures suspended in the 
processing area shall be of safety type and shall not 
*be fixed above the processing table, to prevent con- 
tamination of food in case of breakage. Ventilation 
and lighting shall also be in accordance with the 
Factories Act, 1948(;5cre also IS 3103 : 1975 and IS 
3646 (Parts 1, 2 and 3) : 1966XExhaust fans should 
be provided where necessary. 

3.4 Floor 

The floor shall be smooth, free from crevices, wash- 
able, properly sloped to gullies connected to sewers 
or drains, it shall be impervious to water and not 
affected by steam, weak acids or alkalies. Cemented 
floor shall be made for work room, store room and 
godown. 

3.5 Walls and Ceilings 

Internal walls and ceilings should have smooth, 
non-absorbent light-coloured surface, free from 
crevices and sharp angles, to facilitate their efficient 
cleaning. The junction of the floor with the walls 
and the junction between the two walls should be 
rounded to prevent accumulation of dust. 

3.6 Repairs 

The building shall be maintained in a proper state 
of repair and cleanliness at all times. Whenever 
required, it may be lime washed, painted, disin- 
fected, disinfested and deodorized. 

3.7 Drainage 

Effective drainage should be provided to drain off 
a large quantity of water used for washing the raw 
material, machinery, equipment, tables, floor, etc; 
15 to 30 cm half circular drains with glazed pipe at 
the bottom should be provided. The slope of the 
floor should be towards the drains and the farthest 
end of the floor from the drains should not be more 
than 5 m. The drain openings should be provided 



1 



IS 14134 : 1994 



with screen traps to prevent solid matter from clog- 
ging the drains. The ends of the drains leading to 
the outside of the factory should be made rodent- 
proof by providing screens. The screens shall be 
examined periodically and replaced or cloned, if 
necessary. The drains should have water seals of 
minimum 5 cm dia. At leaist 50 percent of the length 
of the drain should be covered to facilitate the 
movement of trolleys. Mesh type cover for the drain 
should be better to prevent habitation of cock- 
roaches and rodents in closed areas of the drain. 

3.8 Water Supply 

3.8.1 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water {see IS 4251 : 1967). Running water 
under pressure shall be easily accessible to all 
rooms and areas in which food is handled and 
equipment are washed. 

3.8.2 The equipment shall be so installed and used 
that back siphonage of liquid into the potable water 
lines is precluded. 

3.8.3 The storage tanks for water should, unless 
completely sealed, be kept covered with tight fitting 
lids, examined regularly and cleaned out at least 
once every six months. The date of the last cleaning 
and next cleaning shall be prominently displayed on 
the storage tanks. 

3.8.4 The water shall be periodically examined as 
desired by the Licensing Authority chemically and 
bacteriologically. A rea^rd of such examinations 
shall be maintained. 

3.8.5 Auxiliary Water Supply 

Where non-potable water is used — for such pur- 
poses as fire control — it must be carried complete- 
ly in separate lines, identified preferably by colour, 
and with no cross-connection or back-siphonage 
with the lines carrying potable water. 

4 RAW MATERIAL AND OPERATING 
HYGIENE 

4.1 Raw Material and Preparation 

4.1.1 Only sound and wholesome raw material 
should be used for the quick freezing process. Since 
quick freezing cannot improve the original quality 
of the foods being treated, only products at an 
optimum level of freshness and maturity should be 
quick frozen. The raw material should not contain 
decomposed, toxic or extraneous substances. 

4.1.2 The selected raw materials should be in 
prime condition when processing begins. In order 
to minimize the rate of natural deterioration, when 
storage prior to processing is a necessary stage in 
stock holding, all raw materials should be stored for 
a period dictated by actual trade and material 



needs, in conditions capable of maintaining a 
temperature range and degree of relative humidity 
appropriate to the raw materials concerned. 

4.1.3 To minimize microbiological activity, pre- 
cooked foods intended for quick freezing should 
not be held in the temperature range of + 10°C to 
60°C. They should be cooled as rapidly as possible 
in suitable pre-cooling equipment consistent with 
requirements of hygienic processing. 

4.2 Quick Freezing 

4.2.1 After preparation, the product should be 
quick frozen without delay. The quick freezing 
process should be carried out in appropriate equip- 
ment in such a way so as to minimize physical, 
biochemical and microbiological changes. 

4.2.2 To achieve this, the freezing operation 
should be carried out in such a way that the range 
of temperature of maximum crystallization is 
passed quickly (for most products -PC to -S'^C). 

4.2.3 The process should not be regarded as com- 
plete unless and until the product temperature has 
reached - 18**C at the thermal centre after thermal 
stabilization {see IS 8077 : 1976). 

4.2.4 Effective measures should be taken to keep 
temperature rise to a minimum, after the quick 
freezing process and during handling and transport 
to cold storage. 

4.2.5 The recognized practice of repackaging 
quick frozen products should be carried out only 
under controlled conditions. 

4.3 Storage 

4.3.1 Cold stores should be operated so as to main- 
tain a product temperature of — 18**C or lower with 
a minimum of fluctuation. 

4.3.2 Excessive product temperature fluctuations 
either in range or frequency are undesirable. They 
may lead to serious dehydration in susceptible 
products and to other forms of quality deteriora- 
tion. Although temperature fluctuations are 
generally less harmful at lower storage tempare- 
tures, variations greater than 2**C in the air 
temperature should, so far as possible, be avoided. 

4.3.3 Frequent temperature checks should be car- 
ried out, preferably with recording thermometers 
or devices that will continually monitor storage 
temperatures {see IS 8077 : 1976). 

4.3.4 The air velocity in cold stores should be 
moderate and not higher than necessary to achieve 
sufficiently uniform temperatures within the store. 

4.3.5 Products should be stacked so that air cir- 
culation is not impaired. No direct contacts with the 
walls — except in jacketed rooms — celling or floor 



IS 14134 : 1994 



should be allowed. The distance between the stored 
products and the walls, ceiling or floor should be at 
least 10 cm. 

4.3.6 A system of controlled stock rotation should 
be employed in the cold stores. 

4.4 Transportation and Distribution 

4.4.1 The transportation of quick frozen foods 
from one warehouse cold store, to another 
warehouse cold store should be carried out in 
equipment capable of maintaining a product 
temperature of - IS^'C or lower. Vehicles should be 
pre-cooled to + 10°C or lower prior to loading and 
should be equipped with devices to record tempera- 
tures during transportation. 

4.4.2 A temperature rise of the product during 
such transportation from warehouse cold store to 
- 15**C may be tolerated but any product tempera- 
ture higher than - IS^C should be brought down to 
- 18*^0 as soon as possible either during transpor- 
tation or immediately after delivery, 

4.4.3 Loading and unloading from vehicles and 
from stores should be as fast as practicable and the 
methods used should minimize product tempera- 
ture rise. 

4.4.4 During the transportation from one 
warehouse cold store to another warehouse cold 
store as indicated in 4.4.1. frequent temperature 
checks should be carried out using methods of 
recording temperatures visible from outside of the 
vehicle. 

4.4.5 Before loading the vehicle as indicated 
in 4,4.1 and before entering the cold store, the 
product temperature should be checked. 

4.4.6 Transportation of quick frozen foods for 
local distribution to retailers should be carried out 
in such a way that any rise in product temperature 
above - 18°C is kept to a minimum and should not, 
in any case, rise above - 12**C in the warmest pack. 

4.4.7 A temperature rise of the product occurring 
during local transportation as indicated in 4.4.6 
should be brought down to - 18**C, and as soon as 
possible, after delivering. When this is not possible, 
the product should be offered for sale as soon as 
possible. 

4.5 Retail Sale 

4.5.1 Quick frozen foods should be offered for sale 
from refrigerated cabinets designed for the pur- 
pose. 

4.5.2 The cabinets should be capable of maintaining 
and be so operated as to maintain a product tempera- 
ture of ~ 18**C and should be equipped with a ther- 
mometer. 



4.5.3 A rise in product temperature may be 
tolerated for short periods but the product 
temperature of the warmest pack should not be 
allowed to become higher than - 12°C 

4.5.4 Warm air currents from the outside should 
not blow directly into the refrigerated space. 
Cabinets should be located so that the open display 
area is not subjected to a normal radiant heat (for 
example, not in direct sunlight, under strong artifi- 
cial light or in direct line with heaters). Cabinets 
should be covered at night and over the week end. 
Defrosting cycles should be programmed in such a 
way that, as much as possible, defrosting takes place 
outside the normal shopping hours. 

4.5.5 The contents of the cabinet should never be 
stocked outside the load line. Stocks should not be 
removed from and returned to the cabinet except 

when absolutely necessary. 

4.5.6 Unpacked products are subject to the risk of 
contamination and dehydration and should be 
stored and displayed in compartments separate 
from those used for packaged quick frozen foods. 

4.5.7 Foods which are not quick frozen should not 
be placed in a cabinet which contains quick frozen 
foods. Prepackaged edible ices may, however, be 
kept in cabinets containing quick frozen foods. 

4.5.8 Stocks should be carefully rotated to ensure 
that the products are sold on a "First In First Out" 
basis. 

4.6 Packaging and Labelling 

4.6.1 The packaging material should be stored in a 
clean and sanitary manner. The packaging should 
be designed to: 

a) protect the organoleptic and other quality 
characteristics of the product; 

b) protect the product against microbiological 
and other contamination; 

c) protect, as far as practicable, against 
dehydration, heat accumulation by radia- 
tion and where appropriate, leakage; and 

d) not pass on to the product any odour, taste, 
colour or other foreign characteristics, 
throughout the processing (where arp- 
plicable and distribution of the product up 
to the time of final sale. 

4.6.2 Retail packages should be preserved intact 
up to the time of final sale. 

4.6.3 In addition, the packages of quick frozen 
foods should bear clear indications as to the way to 
keep them from the time they are bought at the 
retailer to that of their use. 



IS 14134: 1994 



5 GENERAL HYGIENE 

5.1 For general cleanliness^ all the floors shall be 
swept and washed with detergent at least once in a 
shift. 

5.2 Waste and rubbish shall be collected in covered 
receptacles and shall not be allowed to scatter on 
the floor of the unit It shall be disposed of in a 
manner which is not detrimental to the hygiene of 
the surroundings aftier its disposal. 

5.3 Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent 
mould growth on equipment and internal struc- 
tures of processing and storage rooms. 

5.4 Adequate steps shall be taken to prevent infes- 
tation by cockroaches and other household pests. 
Wherever possible, suitable electrically operated 
flying insect control devices consisting of electrified 
grid and collection tray for collecting dead insects 
should be provided. These devices may be installed 
at strategic points in the premises, specially near 
entry point. Air curtain may also be provided. 

5.5 When pesticides are used, due care shall be 
exercised to prevent contamination of equipment, 
raw materials and packaging materials. (Jnder no 
drcum&tafte^HLjlhaU any pesticides be used diujng 
processing. 

5.6 Roors and drains shall be kept clean. The 
drains shall be made /?wcc^ with proper slope and 
be swept and washed periodically in order to keep 
them free from any deposits. The deposits provide 
suitable substrate for fast growth of the micro* 
organisms. 

5.7 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water. The storage tank for water shall, 
unless completely sealed, be kept covered with tight 
fitting lids, examined and cleaned regularly. 

5.8 Proper places shall be provided for storage 
of brooms, brushes, buckets and other cleaning 
gear. 

5.9 Window glass and light fittings shall be main- 
tained clean and dust-free at all times. 

5.10 There shall be no cobwebs in any pan ot the 
unit. Birds and domestic animals shall not be 
allowed in any part of the unit. 

5.11 No law^ory, sink, cesspool or garbage shall be 
so suited or maintained that odours or fumes there- 
from pervade any room where the product or raw 
materials are prepared or stored. 

5.12 Thedoorsandwindpws shall besuch that they 
would hot allow entry of flies or any other type of 
crawling insects and birds. 



5.13 The factory efQuents shall be disposed of from 
the faaory in a manner which is not detrimental to 
the hygiene of the factory and its surroundings. The 
effluents shall not be let off on road or in the open 
outside the factory premises. 

6 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT HYGIENE 

6A Material for Equipment 

6.1.1 All surfaces coming in contact with the food 
product shall be smooth, free from pits, crevices 
and loose scales and shall be noii-absorbent. Be- 
sides, surfaces shall be non-toxic and unaffected by 
food products and the cleaning chemicals. 

6.1.2 Stainless steel shall be used at all the places 
as material for construction where it comes in con- 
tact with the food products. 

6.1.3 Copper and its alloys, cadmium and lead shall 
not be used where they may come in contact with 
any food products. 

6.1.4 Plastics, wherever used, shall be abrasion- 
resistant, heal resistant to the degree needed for the 
product and for the cleaning process, and shatter- 
proof, and shall not contain free phenol, formal- 
dehyde, or a constituent which may result in the 
migration of any of the substances to the food or 
otherwise affect the characteristics of the food with 
which it comes in contact. 

6.1.5 All gasketing and packing materials shall be 
non-porous, non-absorbent, and fitted in a manner 
such as to prevent their protruding into the product 
or creating recesses or ledges between the gasketed 
joints which will interfere with proper cleaning. 

6.1.6 Wherever food normally comes in contact 
with the equipment surfaces, coatings used as a 
lining to prevent corrosion of the base material of 
food equipment shall be non-toxic, unaffected by 
and inert to the food in contact with it or cleaning 
preparations used on it. Furthermore, such coat- 
ings shall be non-absorbent, odourless and 
tasteless. 

62 Installation of Equipment 

6.2.1 Ail equipment shall be installed on a founda- 
tion of durable, easily cleanable material. 

6.2.2 Equipment shall be placed at least 45 cm 
from walls and ceiling or sealed water-tight thereto. 
All portions of the equipment shall be installed 
sufficiently spaced above the floor on a minimum 
number of supporting metnbers to provide access 
for inspection and cleaning or be installed com- 
pletely sealed (water-tight) to the floor. 

6*2.3 Whenever equipment passes through walls 
or floors, it shall be sealed thereto or sufficient 
clearance shall be allowed to permit inspection, 
cleaning and maintenance. 



IS 14134: 1994 



6.2*4 Where necessary, drains and catch pans shall 
be provided. These shall be of such dimensions as 
to collect ail spill and drip and be readily accessible 
or readily removable for cleaning. 

6.2.5 Where pipes pass through ceilings, in the 
floor above of processing areas, pipe sleeves shall 
be inserted in the floor above so that their 
periphery is at least 5 cm above the floor. 

6.2.6 Pipelines for conveying the product from one 
point to the other should be direct and as short as 
possible and without any dead ends so that they may 
be cleaned internally by flushing with water. Valves 
and taps in the line should be of removable type and 
should have full way opening to avoid formation of 
small pockets of stagnant food. 

6.2.7 The equipment should be constructed and 
installed in such a manner as to facilitate efficient 
cleaning and sanitization and easy dismantling and 
assembling of all the parts that come in contact with 
the product. All the equipment, containers, lids and 
pipes shall be smooth, impervious and corrosion 
resistant. All the materials used for construction of 
those surfaces which come into contact with the 
product shall be non-toxic. 

6.2.8 All the electrical connections, si^c)! as switch 
boxes, control boxes, conduit cables shall be in- 
stalled in such a way as to facilitate proper cleaning. 
All equipment coming into contact with raw 
materials or the products shall be kept clean. 

6.2.9 All refrigerated spaces should be equipped 
with temperature measurement or recording 
devices. These devices should be clearly visible and 
placed in such a way as to register as accurately as 
possible the maximum temperature of the 
refrigerated areas. 

6.3 Cleaning and Sanitation 

6.3.1 All the processing systems shall be thorough- 
ly cleaned with chlorinated water (at least 50*100 
ppm available chlorine depending up to the type of 
food processed) after every processing run to 
remove the micro-organisms, if any and followed by 
washing with potable water to remove the residual 
chlorine in the system. 

6.3.2 All the containers and lids should be cleaned 
thoroughly with the use of sodium carbonate or 
sodium bicarbonate or any other suitable detergent 
solution and sanitized with at least 50-100 ppm 
chlorine solution, depending upon the type of food 
processed, prior to their use. The residual chlorine 
may be removed by flushing the equipment with 
potable water before use. 

6.3.3 Tables and work benches used for cutting and 
packing of food should have staiiiless steel or 



alununium alloy or marble tops. The table and work 
benches top shall always be maintained in good 
condition and cleaned thoroughly before and after 
use. 

7 HYGIENE CONTROL PROCEDURE 

7.1 Sanitation Control Progniinnie 

It is desirable that each plant designates a single 
individual, whose duties are preferably different 
from production, to be held responsible for the 
cleanliness of the plant. His staff should be a per- 
manent part of the organisation and shouki be well 
trained in the use of special cleaning tools, methods 
of disassembling equipment for cleaning, and in the 
significance of contamination and the hazards in- 
volved. Critical areas, equipment and materials 
should be designated for specific attention as part of 
a permanent sanitation schedule. 

7.2 Laboratory Control Procedures 

In addition to any <pontrol by the official agency 
having jurisdiction, it is desirable that each plant in 
its own interest should have access to laboratoiy 
control of the sanitaty quality of the products 
processed. The amount and type of such control 
will vary with the food product as well as the needs 
ol managements Suck control should reject, all 
foods that are unfit for human consumption. 
Analytical procedures used should follow recog- 
nized or standard methods in order that the results 
may be readily interpreted. 

8 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

8.1 Every person employed for handling of raw 
materials and end-products and in packing section 
in the factory shall be medically examined by an 
authorised registered medical practitioner and the 
examination shall include X-ray of the chest for 
tuberculosis. The examination shall also include: 
examination of stool for protozoal and helminthic 
infestation for those parasites which are trans- 
mitted by ingestion, and for the presence of SaU 
monella, Shigella species and Vibro cholerae. 
Subsequently, the employees shall be medically ex- 
amined once in a year or more frequently; if neces- 
sary, to ensure that he/she is medically fit and free 
from communicable diseases. A record of such ex- 
aminations shall be maintained. 

8.L1 It shall be impressed on all employees that 
they should notify the medical officer or manage- 
ment, cases of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, typhoid, 
dysentery, boiIs» cuts and sores and ulcers (however 
small), discharging ears and notifiable diseases oc- 
curring in their own homes and families. 

8.1.2 No worker who is suspected to be sufiering 
fi-om any of the disorders listed above shall be 



IS 14134: 1994 



permitted to work inside the ^nit. The supervisor 
shall check the personal hygiene of the workers 
before the start of work and whenever they enter 
any processing ropm after any absence. 

8.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short 
and clean and wash their hands with soap or deter- 
gent and water before commencing work and after 
each absence, specially after using sanitary con- 
veniences. Towels used for drying hands should be 
clean. No worker shall allow his hands or any part 
of his body or clothing to come in contact with the 
food. He/she should adopt strict hygienic practices 
so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination 
to the material. Women employees shall keep their 
hair tied into a knot under a head gear. 

8*3 All employees shall be inoculated and vac- 
cinated against the enteric groups of diseases once 
a year. In case of an epidemic, all workers shaH be 
inoculated. A record shall be maintained. 

8.4 Employees shall be provided with dean uniforms 
(preferably white) or aprons or both, mouth mask and 
clean washable caps, where necessary. 

8.4.1 Separate room or place for changing the 
clothes shall be provided. The clothes shall not be 
hung in any processing room. 



8J Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of 
tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be 
prohibited within the manufacturing, packing and 
storage area of the unit. Notice to this effect shall 
be prominently displayed and enforced. 

8.6 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences 
shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in 
every factoiy. The conveniences shall ije properly 
lighted. Separate conveniences shall be provided 
for each sex. No convenience shall open direaly 
into any work room in the factory. The convenien- 
ces shall always be maintained clean and in good 
repair. 

8.7 Sufficient number of wash basins with ade- 
quate provision of nail brushes, soap and towels, 
shaU be installed in or alongside the sanitary con- 
veniences. 

9 CHECK UST FOR HYGIENE AND SANITA- 
TION 

9.1 A check list for use by a responsible officer of 
the management is ^ven in Annex B It should be 
used at regular intervals, to ensure hygienic, sanita- 
tion and safety conditions. 



IS No, 
3103 : 1975 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 2 ) 
UST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 

Tule IS No, 



Title 



Code of practice for industrial ven- 
tilation {first jevision ) 

3646 (Par^ 1) : Code of practice for interior il- 
1992 lumination: Part 1 General re- 

quirements and recommendations 
for working interiors {first revision ) 

3646 (Part 2) : Code of practice for interior il- 
1966 lumination: Part 2 Schedule of il- 

lumination and glare index 



3646 (Part 3) : ^Code of practice for interior il- 
1968 lumination: Part 3 Calculation of 

coeffident of utilization by the BZ 
methods 

4251 : 1%7 Quality tolerance for water for 
processed food industry 

8077 : 1976 Procedure for checking tempera- 
ture of quick frozen foods 



ANNEXB 

{Clause 9A) 

CHECK UST FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR PROCESSING AND 
HANDLING OF QUICK FROZEN FOODS 



B-1 SITE 



B-1.1 



Are there any sources producing obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or excessive dust 
nearby? Yes/No 

B-I.2 Any cattle sheds/garbage dumps/ tannery and open sewage drains nearby? Yes/No 



1814134:1994 



B.2 BUILDING 

B-2.1 Is the structure of permanent nature and of suitable size to house the entire 
infrastructure? 

B-2,2 Is the building rodent-proof» fly-proof and bird-proof? 

B-2 J Is any part of the building being used for domestic purposes/food preparations 

without proper partitions? 
B-2*4 Are the premises adequately lighted and ventilated? 
B-2.5 Are the floors smooth and clean and being maintained properly without any 

breakages/ crevices? 
B-2.6 Are the roofe/ ceilings free of water leakage? 
B-2.7 Are the doors/ windows having proper netting/mesh? 
B-2.8 Are scheduled repairs, white washing, disinfection being carried out j-egularly? 
B-2.9 Are the lights shielded to prevent broken glasses contaminating the product? 
B-2.10 Is the drainage system satisfactory? 
B-2»ll Is effluent treatment plant functioning properly? 

B-3 RAW MATERIAL AND OPERATIONS 

B-3.1 Is the plant using only sound and wholesome raw material? 
B-3.2 Is appropriate temperature and humidity maintained for storage of raw material 
as per product requirement? 

B-3.3 Is the precooked food being held at temperature range of -h 10**C to 6(fC for any 

reason? 

B-3.4 Is the product being quick frozen without delay. Is the temperature range of - r 

to -5°C passed quickly? 
B-3.5 Is the final product temperature maintained at lower than - 18**C? 
B-3.6 Is the cold store temperature always less than - 18**C? 
B-3,7 Are proper temperature records or graphs maintained? 
B-3.8 Are the products stacked properly to allow air circulation? 

B-3,9 Is the quick frozen food transported from one warehouse to another at tempera- 
tures below - I8X? 

B-3.10 Does the temperature of product, any time during transportation, rise beyond 
- 15°C? Is it brought down below - 18**C quickly if it has to be stored for long time? 

B-3.11 Is the product sold immediately if its temperature has risen beyond - 12'*C? 

B-3.12 Is the product sold from refrigerated cabinet capable of maintaining -18X 
temperature? 

B-3.I3 Are these cabinets equipped with a proper thermometer for proper reading and 
recording? 

B-3.14 Are the contents in the cabinets stored below load line? 

B-3.15 Are unpacked items stored in separate compartments? 

B-3»16 Are any other items, not related with quick frozen foods, stored in the cabinets? 

B-3.17 Are the stocks rotated on first in first out basis? 

B.4 GENERAL HYGIENE 

B-4.1 Are the floors swept/washed with detergent at least once a shift? 

B-4.2 Is the waste and rubb^h kept in covered receptacles and disposed off regularly? 

B-4.3 Is there any mould growth on the equipment? 

B-4.4 Is there any mould growth on the internal structures of processing and storage 
rooms? 

B-4.5 Are the premises kepi free from cockroaches and other household pests and 
rodents? 



B-4.6 Are the drains cleaned regularly? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Ye^/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 



IS l4l34 : 1994 



B-4.7 Is there adequate supply of potable water? 

B-4.8 Is the potable water stored in proper containers? 

B-4.9 Are the doors and windows properly protected to prevent the entry of flies, birds 

and domestic animals? 
B-4.10 Are the table tops cleaned thoroughly before and after use? 
B-5 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 
B-5,1 Is stainless steel used for construction of parts coming in contact with food? 

Are the tables and work benches used for cutting and packing food having stainless 

steel or aluminium alloy or marble tops? 

Are the equipment surfaces or protective coatings of equipment coming in contact 

with food smooth, free from pits and crevices, non-toxic and non-absorbent? 

Are plastics, if used, abrasion and heat resistant and of food grade? 

Are all the gaskets and packing material of non-porous material and are easily 

cleanable? 

Is the equipment placed at least 45 cm from walls and ceiling or sealed water-tight 

thereK)? 

In cases where equipment passes thro\igh walls or floors, is it sealed thereto or 

sufficient clearance is allowed lo permit inspection, cleaning and maintenance? 

Are drains and catch pans provided? 

Is the entire processing system including pipelines, vessels, tanks, fllling, sealing 

and other machinery being cleaned and sanitized immediately after use? 
B-5.I0 Are all the refrigerated spaces equipped with accurate temperature measuring or 

recording devices? 
B-5.11 Is entire processing system cleaned prior to its re-use again by chlorinated water 

of at least 50^100 ppm available chlorine? 
B-5. 12 Are all the parts of equipment coming into contact with food sanitized before use? 
B-5.13 is sufficient potable water available for flushing the equipment after sanitization 

with chlorine water and further use during processing? 
B-5.14 Are the storage tanks for water properly covered? 
B-5.15 In the water being analysed for its potability and record of such analysis being 

maintained? 

B-6 CONTROL AND MONITORING PROCEDURES 

B-6.1 Is there a defined sanitation schedule? Is it being followed? 

Is the responsibility for cleanliness vested in a specifically traiiied person with 

supporting staff? 

Is there laboratory control of the sanitary quality of the products processed? 

Are there defined analytical procedures* for rejection of products that are unfit for 
human consumption? 

B.7 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 



B-5.2 

B.53 

B-5.4 
B-5.5 

B-5.6 

B.5.7 

B-5.8 
B.5.9 



B-6,2 

B-6*3 
B-6.4 



B-7,1 Are the employees being subjected to complete examination by authorised 

Registered Medical Practitioner at least once a year? 
B-7.2 Is record of medical examination of employees maintained? 
B-7.3 Are cases of fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts, sores, ulcers 

or any other notifiable diseases reported by the employees? 
B-7,4 Are any of the employees suffering from any of the above disorders allowed to work 

inside the unit? 

B-7.5 Are the employees inocculaied and vaccinated against the enteric group of 

diseases once a year and record maintained thereof? 
B-7.6 Are the employees keeping finger nails short and clean? 
B-7.7 Are the employees washing their hands with soap or detergent, especially after 

using sanitary conveniences? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



IS 14134 : 1994 

B-7.8 Is any employee chewing tobacco, smoking, eating or drinking in manufacturing, 

packing and storage area? Yes/No 

B-7,9 Are the employees wearing washed and clean uniforms? Yes/No 

B-7.10 Are the employees wearing head gears. Are the female employees keepii^g their 

hair tied under the head gear? Yes/No 

B-7.11 Are sufficient number of sanitary conveniences and wash basins, etc, provided 

for the employees? Yes/No 

B-7.12 Is there adequate water supply, soaps/detergents available for sanitary convenien- 
ces? Yes/No 

B-7.13 Are there adequate provisions for drying hands after washing? Yes/No 

B-7.14 Are the floors and wash basins of toilet and comfort room being thoroughly 

cleaned? Yes/No 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act. 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization^ marking and quality 
<:ertification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has a copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSrmed when such a review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Addition'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 45 ( 249 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Pablication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Aflfectcd 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 33i 13 75 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEsV DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 430093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephones 



{ 



331 01 31 
331 13 75 



f 37 84 99, 37 85 61 
1 37 86 26, 

{ 



53 38 43, 
53 23 84 



37 86 62 
53 16 40 



235 02 16, 235 04 42 

235 15 19, 235 23 15 

632 92 95, 632 78 58 

632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



