**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11034 (1993) : Implants for surgery - Guidance on care 
and handling of orthopaedic implants [MHD 2 : Orthopaedic 
Instruments, Implants and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 11034:1993 
rSO 8828: 1988 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

IMPLANTS FOR SURGERY — GUIDANCE ON CARE 
AND HANDLING OF ORTHOPAEDIC IMPLANTS 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 61 5-46-004-24 : 61 6-089-843 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August ^99Z Price Group 2 



Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee, MHD 2 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 8828 : 1988 'Implants for surgery ™ Guidance 
on care and handling of orthopaedic implants', issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization ( ISO ) has been adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommend- 
ation of the Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee ( MHD 2 ) and 
approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council, 

This standard was first published in 1984. Its first revision has been taken up and the standard 
is being published as dual number standard to align it with ISO 8828 : 1988. 

The text of above mentioned ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as 
Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'; and 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current 
practice is to use point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 



1811034:1993 
ISO 8828 : 1988 



Indian Standard 



IMPLANTS FOR SURGERY — GUIDANCE ON CARE 
AND HANDLING OF ORTHOPAEDIC IMPLANTS 

( First Revision ) 



Introduction 

The guidance given in this International Standard on the care 
and handling of orthopaedic implants after delivery to the 
purchaser is intended to help ensure that implants remain free 
from contamination or damage prior to insertion into the 
patient. Guidance is given on the procedures for receiving, 
storing, transporting, handling, cleansing and sterilizing 
implants; guidance on cautions necessary for preparing 
implants for use are also outlined. The guidance is aimed at all 
personnel involved in receiving and handling implants. It is 
important that all personnel should be familiar with 
recommended procedures in order to .minimize the risk and 
occurrence of damage to implants. 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard gives guidance on the recom- 
mended procedures for handling orthopaedic implants (such as 
currently used metal, ceramic or polymeric implants/ and also 
including acrylic resin and other bone cements) from receipt at 
the hospital until they are implanted or discarded. 

NOTE — The guidance does not apply to the implant manufacturer. 



2 Definition 

orthopaedic implant : A device implanted surgically, wholly 
or partially, in the body, either temporarily or permanently, and 
used either as an aid in the repair of bone and /or related tissues 
or as a temporary or permanent replacement for these tissues. 

NOTES 

1 Throughout this International Standard, the term "implant" has 
been used to mean "orthopaedic implant". 

2 Acrylic resin cement, used for fixing certain devices, is deemed to 
be an "implant". 



3 General guidance 
3.1 On receipt 

3.1.1 General 

Packaged implants may arrive either 
a) pre-sterilized (see 3.1.2), or 



b) non-sterilized (see 3.1.3). 

3.1.2 Sterile implants 

The packaging of pre-sterilized implants shall be left intact until 
the time of use. The packaging shall be insfjected for dama^. 
If damage is found, the implant should be considered unsterile. 
The implant should then either be returned to the supplier for 
reprocessing or, if appropriate, be repackaged and resterilized 
in the operating area. 

3.1.3 Non-sterile implants 

Some non-sterile implants may be received in special 
sterilizable packaging and this should not be removed. Non- 
sterile implants not packaged in this way should only be 
unwrapped immediately prior to sterilization so as to preserye 
the surface finish and configuration intact, and they should be 
handled as Infrequently as possible. 

3.1.4 Usability of implants 

Any implant that has been dropped or mishandled and which Is 
suspected of having suffered damage shall not be used and 
shall be returned to the supplier. However, the final judgement 
as to the suitability of the implant shaft always tie with the 
surgeon who uses the Implant. 

3.2 Transport 

The implants shall be transported so as to preclude any damage 
or alteration to the condition of the Implant and its packaging 
as received. 

3.3 Stocic records 

3.3.1 General 

Stock records are required to facilitate inventories, stock 
rotation, traceability to the manufacturer and. In some 
instances, for transfer to patienf s records. 

3.3.2 Unique riumbers 

Some implants are marked on their surface with a unique 
number, lot or batch number, or serial number which also 
appears on the package. This number will usually be trans- 
ferred to the patient's records. 



1811034:1993 
ISO 8828 : 1988 



3.3.3 Records to be compiled 

The following information shall be recorded : 

a) type of implant(s); 

b) size of impl3nt(s); 

c) unique number of implant or batch or tot; 

d) material of implant; 

e) the number of implants in a package unit; 

f) date of manufacture or receipt. 

3.4 Storage 

3.4.1 General 

In all storage areas, implants shall be stored prior to use so as to 
maintain the configuration and surface finish of the implant and 
not damage its packaging. Implants should be stored separ- 
ately from instruments. 

3.4.2 Storage conditions 

Where provided, the manufacturer's instructions for storage 
should be followed, if there are no such Instructions, implants 
shall be stored in dry conditions and should not be exposed to 
direct sunlight, ionizing radiation, extremes of temperature or 
particulate contamination. 

3.5 Stock rotation 

The principle of "first in, first out" is recommended. The prac- 
tice of stock rotation should be adopted for al) implants, sterile 
and non-sterile, in all storage areas. 

3.6 Cleaning and sterilization of non-sterile 
implants 

3.6.1 Non-sterile implants may be sterilized without prior 
cleaning if the manufacturer's packaging has been rem.oved im- 
mediately prior to sterilization. 

3.6.2 After each surgical procedure, all implants that may be 
subjected to a resterilization procedure shall be thoroughly and 
carefully cleaned. Ultrasonic cleaning, mechanized washing or 
scrubbing by hand are suitable methods provided that they are 
carried out carefully. The method used should be that which 
prevents impact, scratching, bending or surface contact with 
any materials that might affect the implant surface or con- 
figuration, 

3.6.3 The manufacturer's recommendations on cleaning shall 
be closely complied with. If scrubbing by hand is used, soft 
brushes shall be used and harsh chemicals or harsh cleaning 
solutions shall be avoided. 

3.6.4 After cleaning, the Implants shall be rinsed completely 
free of all residues, soap, detergent or cleaning solutions. After 



rinsing, the implants shall be thoroughly dried. Special atten- 
tion shall be paid to recesses since both chemicals and rinse 
water may be entrapped in them. 

3.6.5 Sterilization shall be carried out by steam autoclaving or 
other methods which will ensure that the integrity of the im- 
plant is protected. 

3.6.6 All Implants shall be sterilized in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommended methods. 

3.6.7 Implants shall not be sterilized In contact with In- 
struments or with implants of other materials; metallic oxide 
and other contaminants could transfer to the implant, thus 
causing an unacceptable condition when Implanted. 

3.7 Appearance 

Implants that show signs of surface or configuration damage 
shall be discarded. 

3.8 Contouring and modifying implants 

3.8.1 Performance characteristics of the implant may be 
altered by contouring or modifying the implant. 

3.8.2 Contouring or clanr^ing of Implants — a procedure 
which is frequently necessary — shall be carried out by the 
surgeon in a manner that will least alter the performance of the 
implant. However, It is recommended that metaluc implants 
should not be bent sharply, re-bent, angulated at a screw hole, 
notched or scratched. 

3.8.3 Implants should not be contoured or modified by the 
use of Instruments that have been damaged or the effec- 
tiveness of which has been impaired. 

3.9 Reuse 

Implants previously Implanted shall not re-used. 

4 Additional guidance on polymeric implants 
and materials 

4.1 Sterilization 

Special attention should be given when using the manufac- 
Vjrer's recommended methods to sterilize most polymeric Im- 
plants and materials; otherwise the process may cause degra- 
dation or other adverse effects. In those Instances where 
resterilization Is possible: the manufacturer's recommended 
methods shall be comj5lied with. Polymers that require special 
attention are ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, acrylic 
bone cements and degradable materials. Silicone elastomers, 
however, may be resterlllzed by steam autoclaving. 

4.2 Acryiic bone cement 

Acrylic bone cement (where the liquid and solid components 
are packed in bottles, bags or other Immediate containers) 



IS 11034: 
ISO 8828 



1993 
1988 



should be discarded at the end of the theatre session if the 
outer of the two enveloping wrappings has been opened. 

4.3 Silicone implants 

The contamination of silicone implants by dust, lint, talc, skin 
oils and other surface contaminants can cause subsequent fluid 
and fibrous tissue buiid-up in the tissues after implantation. 
Silicone implants should always be handled using strict aseptic 
technique anc^ preferably handled only with blunt metal in- 
struments. 



5 Additional guidance on ceramic 
components 

5.1 Sterilization and handling 

Ceramic components, such as the heads and acetabular cups 
of hip joint prostheses, may be supplied in either a steriJe or 
non-sterile condition, it is important that when sterilization is 
carried out, the components are separated and not assembled, 
especially ceramic- to- metal assemblies. Ceramic components 
should not be quenched in water after steam sterilization, but 
should be allowed to cool slowly to ambient temperature. Only 
Instruments having a protective plastics coating should be used 
to handle the ceramic components and the surfaces of the 
spigot of femoral stems. 



6 Additional guidance on implants or 
components of implants with rough surfaces 
or surfaces with intrinsic porosity 

6.1 Sterile implants 

Implants supplied sterile by the nrtanufacturer should be main- 
tained in the sterile packaging. If this packaging Is damaged 
and no longer intact, the implant shall be returned to the/ 
manufacturer for disposal. 

6.2 Subsequent cleaning of implants 

For implants which have been removed from the package and 
inserted into the surgical site, but which have not been im- 
planted or contaminated by other sources, subsequent clean- 
ing may be impossible and the implant should be discarded. 

6.3 Non-sterile implants 

For implants supplied non-sterile, special precautions should be 
followed to prevent contamination and to clean and sterilize the 
implant prior to surgery. If the implant has been inserted into 
the surgical site, but has not been implanted or contaminated 
by other sources, subsequent cleaning may be impossible and 
the implant should be discarded. 



5.2 Dropping of ceramic components 

If a ceramic component is dropped, it should be discarded even 
if there are no signs of damage. 



7 Bibliography 

The following documents will be of use in the application of this 
International Standard : 



5.3 IVIanufacturer's instructions 

The manufacturer's instructions shall be closely complied with 
when ceramic components are being assembled and when 
ceramic heads are being placed on and taken off femoral stems. 



ISO 6018, Implants for surgery — General requirements for 
marking, packaging and labelling. 

ASTM F 565-78, Standard practice for care and handling of 
orthopedic implants and instruments. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assxu-ance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bareaa of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Aetj 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. MHD 2 ( 2356 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Common to all OflBces ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg J331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 \331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 L37 86 ^5, 37 86 62 

'"53 38 43, 53 16 40 



P 

1.37 

f53 38 43, 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 "^ 53 23 84 

Southern : C. I. T, Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 \ ^^^ ^^ ^^ 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \632 78, 91, 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



