**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10020-4 (1981) : Recommendations for design and 
construction of port and harbour components, Part 4: 
Slipways [CED 47: Ports and Harbours] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



15 : 10020 [ P*rtlV)-1981 

' (fleaffirmed2012) 



Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR KtAi J 1996 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PORT AND 
HARBOUR COMPONENTS 



PART IV SLIPWAYS 



UPC 627 33 : 624 04 ; 629 1282 




® Copyright 19S2 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARfi 

MEW DELHJ H0002 

Gr 6 September 1982 



IS:10Q2O(PartIV)-1981 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PORT AND 

HARBOUR COMPONENTS 

PART IV SLIPWAYS 

Ports and Harbours Sectional Committee, BDC 66 

Chairman Representing 

Shri H. R. Laxminarayan Ministry of Shipping and Transport 

Members 
Shri T. R. Subramanyam ( Alternate to 
Shri H. R. Laxminarayan ) 
Shri M. Balasubramaniam Mormugao Port Trust, Vasco-Da-Gama 

Caft P. N.Batra Marine Department ( Calcutta Port Trust ), 

Calcutta 
Capt D. K. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. P. Bhakta Pre-Investment Survey of Fishing Harbour, 

Bangalore 
Shri H. V. Ramaswamy ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Budhbhatti Public Works Department, Government of 

Gujarat, Ahmadabad 
Shri B. P. Kukadia (Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer Chief Engineer's Department ( Calcutta Port 

Trust ), Calcutta 
Chief Ports Officer Maharashtra State Port Authority, Bombay 

Coastal Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Water Commission 

Chief Research Officer I ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. H. Divan ji Asia Foundation and Construction Pvt Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri A. N. Jangle ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Framji Consulting Engineering Services India Pvt Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



@ Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infrigement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 10020 (Part IV) -1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 



Representing 



Shri S. R. Gaitonde 
Shri Hasmukh P. Oza 

Shri A. I. Ibrahim 

Shri S. P. Rao Janamanchi 

Shri P. K. Kandaswamy 



Bombay Port Trust, Bombay 

In personal capacity ( Atul, 20 Pathik Society, 

Ahmadabad ) 
Continental Construction Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 
Engineering Department ( Madras Port Trust ), 
Madras 

Shri M. R. Selvaraj ( Alternate ) 
Capt R. D. Kohli Shipping Corporation of India, Bombay 

Capt G. A. Mande Marine Department ( Madras Port Trust ), 

Madras 
Capt V. K. Kapur ( Alternate ) 
Capt M. V. K. Menon Cochin Port Trust, Cochin 

Capt Abraham Kuruvilla ( Alternate ) 
Capt Subimal Mookerjee Indian Navy ( Operational ), Ministry of Defence 

Cdr P. P. Sivamani ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Nag Hydraulic Study Department ( Calcutta Port 

Trust ), Calcutta 



Dr A. N. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. Nandi 

Prof S. Narasimhan 
Dr I. V. Nayak 

Prof G. Rang anna ( Alternate ) 
Brig Ombir Singh 
Shri B. K. Panthaky 

Shri P. V. Naik ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raghavan 



Project & Equipment Corporation of India Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 
Karnataka Regional Engineering College, 

Srinivasnagar 

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 
Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 



Lakshadweep Harbour Works, New 



Public Works Department, 
Nadu, Madras 



of Defence ), 



Government of Tamil 



Andaman 
Delhi 
Shri M. Gopalakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Rear Admiral K. T. Raju Indian Navy ( Ministry 

Visakhapatnam 
Lt-Col J. R. Taneja ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. V. Ramana Rao Visakhapatnam Port Trust, Visakhapatnam 

Shri S. R. Roessler Home (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri C. S. Debke ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer 

(Central Mechanical 
Circle ) 
Senior Deputy Chief Engineer 
( Bldgs ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. C. Tandon 

Shri M. K. Chatterjeb ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. D. Tapasvi Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. Chowdhury ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretaries 

Shri K. M. Mathur 

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Shri M. N. Neelakandhan 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



Stup Consultants Ltd, Bombay 



IS: 10020 (Part IV) -1981 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PORT AND 

HARBOUR COMPONENTS 

PART IV SLIPWAYS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part IV ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Ports and 
Harbours Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is being issued in various parts to cover various compo- 
nents of ports and harbours. This part ( Part IV ) covers the recommen- 
dations for design and construction of slipways. 

0.3 Slipways are one of the facilities provided in ports for reconstruction 
and repairs of vessels in dry condition. Slipways are inclined ways made of 
timber or stone or steel or concrete running up from a sufficient depth of 
water to the requisite height above high water level, upon which a series of 
rails or steel joists are fixed. On these rails or steel joists cradles run to 
support the vessel and are hauled up or lowered down by means of hauling 
gear. 

0.3.1 This standard ( Part IV ) has been formulated to cover the recom- 
mendations for planning, design and construction of slipways. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in 
this country. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part IV ) covers the planning, design and construction of 
slipways for repairs or overhaul of vessels. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2,1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given IS : 7314-1974* 
shall apply. 

3. PLANNING 

3.1 Selection of Location — The conditions given in 3.1.1 to3.I.H should be 
satisfied for a good location of a slipway. 

3.1.1 The site should be reasonably sheltered from high winds, waves and 
strong currents. The wave should not be more than 0*3 to 0*6 m in height 
at the time of slipping. 

3.1.2 The site should not be subjected to either excessive siltation or 
erosion and should have a reasonably stable bank. 

3.1.3 The bearing capacity of the soil in the area shall be sufficiently high 
to enable a foundation that will preclude undue settlement. 

3.1.4 There should be adequate distance from the high waterline to the 
approach channel so as to provide safe fair way for vessels approaching or 
leaving the slipway. 

3.1.5 Adequate depths of water should be available at the down haul end 
of the slipway to accommodate the proposed maximum size of vessel and its 
cradle, over the slipway. It should have adequate depth of water for the 
proposed maximum size of vessel to be slipped. 

3.1.6 The site should have easy approach and sufficient space for manoeu- 
vering of the vessel. 

3.1.7 There should be sufficient adjoining land for provision of transfer 
track, repair berths, winch houses, workshops and offices and for future 
expansion. 

3.1.8 Slipways should be so sited as to avoid interference with future 
development of other port facilities like wharfage, rail and road approaches, 
etc* 

3.1.9 There should be good accessibility for transportation. 



♦Glossary of terms relating to port and harbour engineering. 

4 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

3.1.10 Adequate electric power, water supply, compressed air and cranage 
facilities should be available. 

3.1.11 Adequate length of wharfage in the vicinity is desirable for carrying 
out afloat repairs. 

3.1.12 The slipway should be constructed near to a well-developed modern 
port with industrial capacity for the repair and manufacture of ships. 

3.2 Site Investigations 

3.2.1 For the purpose of selection of a suitable site for the slipway, com- 
prehensive survey of physical topography of the area, hydrographic survey 
of the approaches to the site of the slipway and the adjoining bank of the 
site to a considerable distance on either side of the proposed site should be 
conducted. 

3.2.2 The velocity and duration of predominant and prevailing winds at 
the proposed site for at least the last ten years should be ascertained. 

3.2.3 All topographic, oceanographic and soil investigation data as 
enumerated in IS : 4651 ( Part I )-1974* shall be collected for the site. 

3.3 Orientation of Slipway 

3.3.1 Slipway should preferably be oriented such that the vessels, while 
being manoeuvred or slipped on to or off the cradle, should not be broad- 
side to the predominant strong winds or currents and should make as acute 
an angle as possible to the strong winds and currents. 

3.4 Docking of Vessels 

3.4.1 For rapid slipping anywhere, and for slipping at sites where tidal 
conditions are particularly unfavourable, it is essential to hold the vessels 
securely in position while centring over the cradle. Where this could be done 
from adjoining wharves or walls, no other facilities are required; but usually 
it is necessary to construct fixed mooring dolphins, or a small lead-in jetty 
fitted with at least two mooring bollards and a fairlead for handling the lines 
from the vessels. 

3.4.2 To indicate the centre of the submerged cradle, when the vessel is 
being centred over it, an indicating staff may be fixed at the centre of the 
upper end of the cradle to project vertically out of the water surface. More 
efficient and satisfactory arrangement is to build side framing on to the 
cradle on three sides to define the outline of cradle when under water and 
to guide the vessel into position. 



♦Code of practice for planning and design of ports and harbour: Part I Site investi- 
gation ( first revision } . 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 
3,5 Types of Slipways 

3.5.1 Slipways are either of the end-on type ( see Fig. 1 ) or broad-side 
pattern ( see Fig. 2 ) according to whether, the vessel is hauled clear of the 
water in the direction of its length or normal to this direction. 

3.5.2 An end-on slipway requires considerably less water-front space than 
the broad-side slipway which may form an important consideration. An 
end-on pattern would require only 1/3 water front of broad-side pattern 
and also operation is safe and less complicated due to a lesser area of the 
vessel offering resistance in the direction of the haul. 

3.5.3 In order to enable to effect repairs for several vessels simultaneously, 
the slipway may be provided with transfer tracks and transfer cradle and 
repair berths. The transfer track will run perpendicular to the slipway 
track, and the repair tracks, perpendicular to the transfer track ( or parallel 
to the slipway ) as shown in Fig. 3. 

3.5.4 When the vessels are to be transferred to transfer cradle and repair 
berths, it is desirable and convenient if the vessels are brought to horizontal 
position from the inclined position. For bringing the vessel to the horizon- 
tal position, one of the following three systems can be adopted: 

a) A vertical curve in the slipway track, or 

b) A tilting bridge at the top end of the slip, or 

c) A subsidiary sloping cradle under the main cradle. 

3.5.4.1 The vertical curve has limitations and is suitable only for small 
vessels up to 150 tonnes for end-on pattern, because the cradle has to be 
supported only at two ends ( like a railway bogie ) and the diameter of 
wheels increases considerably with higher loads. 

3.5.4.2 Tilting bridge can be made use for vessels up to 300 tonnes. 
For heavier vessels it would require very heavy foundations and powerful 
synchronised jacks because the bridge tilts on a single point support ( see 
Fig. 4 ). 

3.5.4.3 Sloping cradles would have no limitations as the main cradle is 
kept on a sloping cradle which compensates for the slipway with a triangular 
structure as shown in Fig. 5. However, this would require long slipways and 
greater depths of water at the end of the slipway to accommodate the height 
of the sloping cradle and also extra power for hauling the weight of the 
sloping cradle. 

3.5.5 For broad side pattern, vertical curves would be very advantageous 
because of the large number of wheels available to take the load. 



-WINCH HOUSE 




DOWN HAUL 
EXTENSION -w 

JMJMilJi' 1 
ill |!| ill III 



T jiiji II H 



RANGE OF SLOPES: 1 IN 12 TO 1 IN 30 

OPTIMUM SLOPES : 1 IN 15 




Fig. 1 End-on Slipway 



w 









oo 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 




TWELVE ROLLERS 
PER ROLLER FRAME 



" * *- 

TO HEADBLOCK 
AND WINCH 



ROLLEft 

FRAMES 




TO, HEADBLOCK 
AND WINCH 



DIAGRAM OF- 500 TONNE 
CRADLE BROADSIDE SLIPPING 



of 
o< 

4 

of 

4 



CROSS SECTION 
OF 
BROADSIDE-SLIPWAYS 



Fig. 2 Typical Cradle 



3.5.6 The transfer cradle will have rails on top at the same level as that 
of the top end of slipway or tilting bridge or the sloping cradle to take the 
main cradle on to the transfer cradle. The rail top of the repair track will 
be at the same level as that of the transfer cradle rail. The main cradle is 
hauled on to the transfer cradle by the main winch. The transfer cradle is 
hauled by a side winch to the front of the required repair track and the 
main cradle is again hauled on the repair track from the transfer cradle 
with the help of side winch and pulley system. 



8 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 



«— — - -~t! " !r— ; 

FUTURE REPAIR I lj 

TRACKS i 



f- 



!r 




REPAIR TRACKS 



e 



WINCH- 
HOUSE 



8m2 ' TRANSFER 

r ™ rrn ' CRADLE 



WORK 
SHOP 



CRANE 



3 



SLOPE. 1:15 



■I 



SLIPWAY 



UNDER WATER 



V-TRANSFER 
TRACKS 

Fig. 3 Slipway Layout 

3.5.7 In order to enable more than one vessel to be dealt with on an end- 
on slipway, it may be provided with side slipping arrangement ( Fig. 6 ). 
In such cases, vessels are slipped out of water in the end-on position up the 
slipway and at the top, traversed sideways on either side of the main cradle. 
This may be done by mounting side traversing cradles on cross rails on the 
main cradle. The rails should be interlocked with the fixed cross rails of 
the side berths at the top of the slipway and the traversing cradles be hauled 
over by winches. For very small vessels, a turntable ( Fig. 7 ) arrangement 
with a number of layout berths could also be provided. 

3.6 Cradle and Cradle Supports 

3.6.1 The cradle is a framework of timber and/or steel consisting of 
two or more longitudinal beams and cross beams to support the keel and 
bilge blocks. In case of three or more central longitudinal beams the 
central unit will have to be designed for full load of the vessel while the 
side longitudinal beams will have to be designed at least for 1/3 of the 
vessel load plus likely wind loads on the broad side of the vessel to with- 
stand loads due to any tilt of the vessel to one side. The top of the keel 
blocks may be sloped inwards to the centre so that the vessel slides to the 
centre of the cradle by its own weight as it is hauled out of water. The 
bilge blocks have to be made sliding or adjustable to fit the different shapes 



w> 



i 







8 



Fig. 4 Tilting Bridge with Two Double Acting Hydraulic Jacks 



,_i AVWV-i I 




-WIRE FOR HAULING 
THE CRADLE TRANSVERSE CRA , 

/ WITH WINCH n 



WINCH HOUSE 



w\\\ # 



■B ff 



^l®3 



A a 



TRANSVERSE 
WIRE FOR HAULING TRACK 

THE CRADLE ONTO 
THE TRANSVERSE 
CARRIAGE 



BOAT 
CRAOLE- 




Fig. 5 Sloping Cradle 



SLOPING CRAOLE 



K 



o 






s 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 



WINCHES 




Fig. 6 Layout of Side-Traversing Slip 

of vessels. The whole structure is to be mounted on wheel trains 1 or 
numerous cast iron rollers of required diameter working in a steel carriage. 
Cradle may be single unit or in several units so that the required length 
can be obtained by joining the units. The cradle need not be equal to the 
length between perpendiculars ( LBP ) of the largest vessel proposed to be 
hauled but can be shorter by 1/4 the LBP so that about 1/8 of the vessel 
may overhang on either side as the loads at either ends would be very 
small due to the shape of the vessel. A plough for the removal of accumu- 
lation of silt over the rails may be a desirable attachment. Pawl racks are 
attached to the beam carrying the rails and the pawl lever to the central 
longitudinal of the cradle at intervals of about 6 metres to prevent back- 
slip of the cradle in case of winch or rope failure. 

12 




C/5 



O 

o 

O 



h3 



super b£p^ h " 
Fig. 7 End-on Slipway with Turntable Arrangement 



00 



IS; 10020 (Part IV) -1981 

3.6.2 The cradles are of three types (a) rigid, (b) semi-rigid, (c) tele- 
scopic or collapsible. The design of the cradle depends to some extent 
whether live roller system or the wheel and bearing system is employed. 

3.6.3 Rigid Cradle 

3.6.3.1 Considered from the operational angle the rigid cradle with 
continuous wheel trains on each rail is the best. But the wheel trains 
interfere with clear access to the bottom of vessels in their vicinity and the 
slip has to extend into the water to the full length of the cradle to accom- 
modate the whole of the cradle. 

3.6.4 Semi-rigid Cradle 

3.6.4.1 The semi-rigid cradle is a compromise between the rigid and 
the collapsible. With this type, it is possible to deal with not only vessels 
of the maximum size for which the slipway has been designed but also with 
two or three small vessels simultaneously. The cradle in this type is divi- 
ded into three or more parts connected together by chains. By this 
arrangement the length of the slipway underwater, where the construction 
is more expensive, is reduced to the extent of the sum of the lengths of the 
connecting chains. Also a portion of the wheel trains may be moved out 
of the way to give access to the bottom of the vessel. 

3.6.5 Telescopic or Collapsible Cradle — Telescopic or collapsible cradles 
are merely separate bogies carrying the keel blocks, interconnected by 
chains or drawbars. The outer bogie wheels are flanged and run /on rails \ 
of heavy section, while the centre wheels on each side of the pawl rack may 
be flat rollers running on steel joists. 

Any bogies can be moved to one side to allow clear access to the 
vessel's bottom. This type is probably the most economical in initial cost 
as the underwater track may be considerably shortened and considerable 
saving on costly underwater construction can be effected. The disadvantage 
of the collapsible cradle is the concentration of the load in a few points 
throughout the length, requiring heavy section of supporting beams, parti- 
cularly on piled foundation. A further drawback is the damage caused by 
the binding of the wheel flanges against the rails. Owing to the short wheel 
base of each bogie the vessel may settle on the leading block at an angle 
which is not square to the bogie axle; so that on hauling up, the wheel 
flanges are not in line with the rails. The vessel setting on the carriages in 
this position renders the whole system rigid and high lateral stresses are 
imposed on the rails and beams. To prevent such happenings, the carriages 
may be fitted fore and aft of the wheels, with projecting plates bent under 
the bulb of the rails to serve as a guide and hold the carriage to the track. 



14 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

3.6.6 Cradle Supports 

3.6.6.1 The roller system, using wheel and bearing system has certain 
advantages, namely a small height of cradle structure and a low weight, 
together with simple lubrication. But there is a limit imposed by the maxi- 
mum allowable axle bearing pressure, which should be taken into account 
when consideration is given to heavy local loads which may arise, for 
example, at the point of full sue in normal docking or when attempting to 
dock a vessel which has sustained a severe-damage below the water line. 

3.6.6.2 The live roller system has certain advantages, principally in the 
reduction of friction and consequent reduction in the power required for 
haulage. Further the heavy load is distributed over the bodies of the rollers 
and is not sustained by the axle and bearings. On the other hand, there is 
the disadvantage that a considerable portion of the roller frame is perma- 
nently submerged and inaccessible for ready examination, maintenance and 
repair. 

3.6.6.3 The combination of the two systems could also be adopted for 
slipways for heavier vessels, that is, live roller system on the central track 
and wheel and bearing, on the side tracks. Thus heavy central distributed 
load imposed by the vessels keel could be efficiently dealt with by central 
roller path, and the necessary bilge support by the wheel and bearing system. 
There would still exist of course the disadvantage of considerable part of 
the roller form of central track being permanently under water. 

3.6.7 Where the slip is required to cater for vessels which house their 
engines and heavy haulage gear aft, determination of a precise loading lay- 
out for the cradle is not possible unless a study of numerous types and 
sizes of vessels is made. Again, vessel which is shorter than the cradle and 
is of rectangular or barge shape will impose heavy sue loads part of the way 
down the cradle. Accordingly, the first section of cradle will have to bear 
higher sue loads than the remaining sections of the cradle. 

3.6.8 All cradles should preferably be provided with keel blocks and for 
bigger vessels with bilge blocks. Generally, the bilge blocks system should 
be designed for side supports to vessel loads due to winds acting on broad- 
side of the vessel while hauling. 

3.7 Haulage 

3.7.1 The hauling gear in general consists of powerful winches worked 
by steam, diesel or electricity. For haulage wire ropes or endless chain 
system is used. 

3 7.2 The slipways may be operated by an electric motor through two or 
three trains of spur reduction gears, clutches being provided to enable the 
main drum to be freed for the return of the empty cradle. A further 

15 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

development is the use of electrically-driven variable speed gears, 
comprising a pump and hydraulic motor with oil as the media. 

3.7.3 In some cases, direct acting hydraulic rams are used, connected to 
the cradle by means of a series of steel links, each link being of a length 
equal to the stroke of the ram. After each stroke, the cradle is arrested 
and one link is removed, the cross head of the ram being made fast to 
the next. Later development in this system has obviated the necessity of 
removal of links. 

3.7.4 Cradles may be lowered by the backhaul system similar to the 
uphaul with the help of the winch by reversing the mechanism to control the 
speed of downhaul. 

3.7.5 The pull on the hauling chain can be calculated from the following 
expression: 

P= W(S + C) 

where 

P = pull on the hauling chain in tonnes; 

W = weight of the vessel + the weight of the cradle + the weight 
of hauling chains and ropes in tonnes; 

S e= tan 0, where is the angle of slop of the slip; and 

C — coefficient of friction which may be taken as 0*035 for 
wheels and 04 for rollers. 

3.8 Other Repair Facilities 

3.8.1 It would be desirable to provide sheds of sufficient height to clear 
mast of the vessel, over the repair-berths so that repair works may be 
carried out at all seasons with reasonable protection from the weather. 

3.8.2 It is advantageous to provide suitable crane facilities for the work, 
either a mobile crane or a travelling crane on independent level track and 
foundation along one side of the slipway with sufficient jib length to plumb 
at least the middle of the vessel. 

3.8.3 A suitable water jet arrangement to clear the silt, debris, etc, that 
may collect over the ways and floor, should be provided. In waters of high 
tidal range it may be expedient to provide flushing basin at the shore end 
of the slip. This is filled to high tide level and then at or near the time of 
low water, valves are opened and the water directed in a strong stream to 
clear the ways. 

16 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

3,8.4 Adequate and well planned workshop facilities with plate bending, 
welding, smithy, carpantry and machine shops should be located as close to 
the slipway as possible. 

3.9 The height of the top of the rails above high water mark is governed by 
the working headroom from the underside of the vessel's bottom to deck 
floor between the tracks; below high water mark the rails may be at beach 
level. The working headroom is usually l'l metre minimum. 

3.10 Buffer stops should be provided at the bottom or sea end of the slip 
to prevent the cradle from running off the rails, and at the top end a single 
stop for the bridle bogie on the central rail to prevent over-winding. The 
buffer stops at the bottom end of the ways should be adequate to absorb 
the energy of empty cradle travelling at a speed down the inclination of the 
ways. 

4. DESIGN 

4.1 Length of Slipway 

4.1.1 Slipways are generally designed to be not less than 2\ times the 
length of the largest vessels to be accommodated. The length and draft of 
the vessel to be catered for, the slope of the slipway and height of the blocks 
above rail level are the influencing factors in determining the length of 
slipway. The following expression takes these factors into consideration: 

L = 21 + s(d+ h) + 6 

where 

L = length of slipway in metres, 

/ = length of vessel between perpendiculars in metres, 

s = horizontal distance for unit rise of slip inclination, 
d = draft of vessel at forecastle bulkhead in metres, and 

h = height from rail level to top of blocks in metres. 

4.1.1.1 The length L should be increased to account for an extension 
seawards for downhaul extension gear. If it is intended to slip the vessel at 
any other state of tide than the high water, this length should further be 
increased by the length falling within this tidal range. 

4.1.1.2 In determining the overall length of the slipway t allowance 
should also be made for the clearance of about 60 cm over the draft of the 
vessel to allow for the contingency that may arise at times of slipping of 
damaged or waterlogged vessels. 

17 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

4.1.2 In water of large tidal range, considerable economy in the construc- 
tion of the underwater portion of the slipway may be effected by obviating 
the necessity of providing cofferdam for the construction, if slipping opera- 
tion is restricted to high water or within a short range from high water. 

4.2 Inclination of Slipway 

4.2.1 The inclination of the slipway may vary between 1 in 12 to 1 in 30. 
It is found that the most economical and convenient slope is between 1 in 
12 to 1 in 15, A steeper slope has the disadvantage of heavy haulage and 
a shore-end too high for convenient work. A lesser slope, whilst being less 
exacting on the haulage, leads to a long slip and long haulage wires, thus 
entailing heavy initial outlay and maintenance. In case of a very flat slope, 
the natural tendency of the cradle to go down under its own weight would 
be so reduced as to impose a severe load on the backhaul foundation. 

4.2.2 To off-set the disadvantage, in case of steep-sloped slipway, of shore 
end of the vessel in dry position being much higher than the other, curved 
profiles to suit the natural back slope may be adopted in lieu of uniform 
inclination, but the radius of curvature should be constant throughout. 

4.3 Vessel's Weight and Tonnage 

4.3.1 A vessel's weight for dry docking is the unladen weight of the 
vessel including the weight of fuel, stores and water, etc, but excluding 
cargo. The displacement of the vessel in laden and unladen conditions is 
usually available in the ship's records. In absence of this information, the 
displacement weight may be determined by the following formula: 

W= L X B XDx C 

where 

W — displacement weight of vessel in tonnes; 

L = length of the vessel between perpendiculars in metres; 

B = breadth of the vessel at the waterline amidship in metres; 

D = mean of the draft of the vessel fore and aft in metres; and 

C = block coefficient, that is, the ratio between the volume of 
the wetted portion of the vessel and the volume of the 
enclosing block. 

If the block coefficient, C, is unknown, the following table of approxi- 
mate values for respective type of vessel in the light condition may be found 
useful. 

18 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

Type of Vessel Block Coefficient, C 

Ocean cargo ship 056 to 0*65 

Ocean tankers 060 to 0*70 

Ocean tugs and trawlers 0*54 to 0*56 

Passenger liner 0*55 to 0*60 

Naval destroyers 0*52 

Naval cruisers 0*57 

Fishing vessels — small to big 040 to 0*60 , 

4.4 Loads 

4,4.1 Load distribution on the cradle and slipway due to the vessel varies 
with the type, size and shape of the vessels. However, determination of the 
distribution of load on the cradle is necessary for the design. The nearest 
approximation of load distribution may be done by drawing load distribu- 
tion curves for several typical shapes and sizes of vessels that are likely to 
be hauled on the slipway on the basis of their volumetric displacement, 
because the distribution of weight of the vessel on its keel is proportional 
to the loss of buoyancy of the vessel. By knowing the layout diagram of 
the vessels for light draft condition, the volumetric displacements may be 
established as follows: 

a) Divide the vessel into different segments; 

b) Calculate the volume of each segment below the light draft water 
line including the overhanging portions, if any; 

c) Plot the load diagrams for the supported length of keels on the 
cradle by multiplying the volumetric displacements with the specific 
gravity of sea water; and 

d) Draw a line enveloping all the diagrams for different vessels, which 
becomes the load diagram for the cradle. 

The above loads along with the self- weight of cradle are transferred to 
the slipway at the wheel points of the cradle. 

4*4,2 Sue Load 

4.4.2.1 A concentrated load called sue load is induced on the cradle 
and the tracks at inboard and outboard ends of the cradle while hauling and 
this load is to be calculated to determine whether the sue load or the distri- 
buted load mentioned in 4.4.1 is greater at any point. 

19 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

4.4.2 2 As the cradle along with the vessel is hauled, the magnitude of 
the load increases from the point of first contact of the vessel with the cradle 
and becomes maximum just before the vessel is about to loose all its 
buoyancy. Sue load normally varies from 1/3 to 1/8 of the light displacement 
of the vessel depending upon the shape and size. 

4.4.2.3 Calculation of sue load — The sue load is calculated as follows: 

a) About the point of intersection of light draft water line with the 
keel line at the aft of the boat or boats, calculate the moment of 
volume of each of the segments below light draft water line and 
find the sum of all the moments and the volumetric displacements. 

b) Find the distance of the centre of buoyancy by dividing the total 
moment obtained for the light draft condition by the sum of the 
total volumetric displacement for the same and from this distance 
subtract the distance between *0* and the first point of contact of the 
vessel with the cradle ( X ), which gives the distance to the centre 
of buoyancy from point X . 

c) Find the moment of the total volumetric displacement at light draft 
position and obtain the new moment about the point * x \ 

d) Work out the volumetric displacements for the different portion of 
submerged segments for 3 to 4 positions of water lines below and 
inclusive of the light draft water line, imagining the vessel is hauled 
and drawing the waterline position on the vessel for the respective 
inclined positions of the vessels. 

e) Tabulate for each different water line, the volumetric displacement 
of the position of submerged segments, and their moments, about 
the point ' X \ 

f ) Draw a graph of the sum of the moments against the sum of the 
displacements for the different water lines obtained from (e). 

g) Mark the moment determined as per (c) on the graph and get the 
corresponding displacement. 

h) Subtract the displacement determined as per (g) from the total 
displacement of the vessel at light draft position which gives the sue 
load at the first point of contact. 

4.4,3 The cradle should preferably be designed for the higher of the loads 
obtained by either sue load calculation or load distribution. The entire 
slipway except for the lowest 1/3 of the cradle length should also be designed 
for the higher of the two loads and the lowest and 1/3 cradle length for the 
weight of the cradle only so that the structure will be safe for all possible 
types and sizes of vessels, unexpected loads and different position of tides, 
etc. 

20 



IS : 10020 ( Part IV ) - 1981 

4.5 Foundations 

4.5.1 The form of slipway and the nature of the ground to a great extent 
determine the most suitable form of construction. Foundation should, if 
possible, be absolutely incompressible, but failing that, a very slight settle- 
ment is permitted, provided it is uniform throughout. Risk of uneven 
settlement should be avoided otherwise damage may be caused to the ship 
by broken cradles or rollers. 

4.5.2 In soil with good bearing capacity, spread foundations or a form of 
mattress construction under the tracks connected by concrete floor may be 
used. A sheet pile cut-off wall should be provided at the water-end to 
protect spread or raft foundations against undermining by scour. 

4.5.3 When the soil is of low bearing capacity, piled foundation with rail 
track supported on mild steel sections, spanning the pile bents may be used. 
The pile caps to which steel work is secured should be reinforced concrete 
construction. 

4.5.4 The foundations shall be so designed as to take into account the 
probability that the whole weight of the vessel may have to be carried by 
the central track. 

4.5.5 Where the slipways are required to handle bottom dump barges, 
which would impose heavy loads towards each side of the cradle over a con- 
siderable portion of its length, all three ways should be of robust 
construction. However, in such cases it may be economical to construct 
the slipways with two tracks only since the added cost of construction for 
strengthening the three ways would be more than offset by the economy of 
constructing only two ways, particularly in underwater section. Moreover, 
it would be easier to align two tracks accurately under water than three. 

4.5.6 Heavy lateral forces will be induced across the slips by the cradles 
due to self alignment in any type of cradle and may be approximately calcu- 
lated from the hauling load and the speed of haul. However, reduction in 
lateral forces may be effected with wheels of cradles having flanges alter- 
nately inside and outside. 

5. CONSTRUCTION 

5.1 As the lower end of a slipway is under water, a cofferdam is usually 
necessary for its construction in most cases, except when tidal range is large 
and vessels are proposed to be slipped at or near high water. The weight 
to be supported on the cradle over the underwater portion of the way dimi- 
nishes as the ways get deeper and the load on the extension will probably be 
only that of the weight of the cradle. The foundation for the extension, 
portion therefore need be much lighter in construction. 

21 



IS: 10020 (Part IV) -1981 

5.2 It is essential that alignment and levelling of rail tracks requiring greater 
accuracy should be done in the dry. Accurate work under water needs 
more time, skill and experience and for a permanent slipway, a cofferdam 
would be advantageous; in any case, it is just as cheap and as quick as 
working under water. 

5.3 The construction of slipways with pile foundation is advantageous and 
economical under suitable site conditions. Tidal and under water excava- 
tion for continuous footings is very troublesome at some sites, especially where 
soft mud overlays a good substratum of gravel or sand and after completion 
sometimes even during construction, siltation and scouring of continuous 
walls present another problem; in such cases, piled slipways are recom- 
mended. In actual construction, driving the piles to an accurate line and 
level is difficult and as a result, considerable delays may occur. 

5.4 The following constructional tolerances are allowed: 

a) Along the line of slip: ± 10 mm, with a maximum rate of change 
of 10 mm in 5 metres or 20 mm in 15 metres. 

b) Across the slip: 10 mm in levels. 



22 



