**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10081 (1981) : Terms Relating to Commercial Explosives, 
Pyrotechnics and Blasting Practices [CHD 26: Explosives and 
Pyrotechnics] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS r 10001 ■ 19S1 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Sfmuiard 

GLOSSARY OF 
TERMS RELATING TO COMMERCIAL 
EXPLOSIVES, PYROTECHNICS AND 
' BLASTING PRACTICES 



UDC 662 1/5^001*4 




® Cff[tynghi 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS iNSTITtfTlON 

MA^JAK WHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAl- AR MARG 

EfEW DFXH1 1 10002 

Qr 7 Srptmkr 1982 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF 
TERMS RELATING TO COMMERCIAL 
EXPLOSIVES, PYROTECHNICS AND 
BLASTING PRACTICES 



Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee:, CDC 51 

Chairman Representing 

S.Ht:i R. G. Deoi-alikki; Directorate Geiioral Ordnance Factories, Calcutta 

Members 

Shki K, p. R. Pii.r.AY ( Alternate to 
Shri R. G. Deolaliker ) 
Shri T. p. Balakrishnas" Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad 

Shhi U. W. Datey ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Belwal National Fertilizers Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri Charanjtt Lal Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shbt B. R. Dave ( Alternate ) 
Dk a. K. CtiATTEKJEE IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Dr H. B. Bathina ( Alternate I ) 
Dr G. D. Prasad ( Alternate II ) 
Shri G. M, Chopka Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia 

Db S. N, Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C Das Gupta Narenda Explosives Ltd, Dehra Dun 

Shri C. M. Deosthale Indo-Burma Petroleum Co Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. V. ChandokxaR ( Alternate ) 
Director ( Mines Safety Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 
Equipment ) 
Joint Director of Mines 
Safety ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Gbahadurai National Fireworks Factory, Sivakasi 

Shri R. 'I'hangamariappak ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Krishnamurthi Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad 

Shhi M. M. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
SiiRi B, MiNj Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri A. K. Chatteiijee ( Alternate ) 
Siini K. C. Nakayaxan" Development Commissioner ( Small Scale 

Industries ), New Delhi 
Shri D. V. Rao National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 

Hyderabad 
Shri P. R. Gupta ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



(g) Copyright 1982 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dii K. R. K. Rao Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri p. R. Roy Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited, 

Ranchi 
Shki S. S. S.alodkab Coal India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri U. W. Datey ( Alternate ) 
Prof V. P. Singh Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 

Dr Sub jit Sixan Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri M. G. Bhagwat ( Alternate ) 
Dr Hari Bhagwan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. K, Mathxjr 
Deputy Director ( Chemicals ), ISI 



Classification and Terminology Subcommittee, CDC 51 : 5 

Convener 
Dn S. B, Ray Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Members 
Shri M. G. Bhagwat ( Alternate to 
Dr S. B. Rav ) 
Shri Charanjit Lal Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Shri B. R. Dave { Alternate ) 
Shri C. M. Dkosthale Indo-Burma Petroleum Co Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. V. Chandorkak ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Ghabia Explosives Research & Development Laboratory, 

Pune 
Shri K; Vbskatesan { Alternate ) 
Joint Director of Mixes Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Shri V. Krishnamurthi Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad 

Shri M. M. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Naoarajan IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri R. Govindarajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Seshan Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia 

Shbi B. S. Roy ( Alternate ) 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF 
TERMS RELATING TO COMMERCIAL 
EXPLOSIVES, PYROTECHNICS AND 
BLASTING PRACTICES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 3 1 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Explo- 
sives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Chemical Division Council. 

0,2 The Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee felt the 
necessity for a comprehensive list of terms used in commercial explosive 
and pyrotechnic industry and their precise and commonly agreed 
definitions in order to avoid ambiguity and confusion to manufacturers 
and consumers. It is expected that this standard would eliminate 
ambiguity in the interpretation of terms used in trade and industry. 

0.3 Indian Standards for various explosives and their accessories have 
been formulated. This standard is being issued as an adjunct to these 
standards. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the terms and definitions that are prevalent in 
commercial explosives, pyrotechnics and blasting practices. 

2. TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

A 

Abel Heat Test — British official heat test which is generally applied 
to nitro-expJosives. The principle of the test is to note the time required 
to produce a standard tint on a potassium iodide-starch paper when the 
explosive is heated under specified conditions. 

Acoustic Warning — A distinctive audible warning used to indicate 
the start of blasting operation. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Actuator, Explosive — A self- containing power transmitting device io 
convert chemical energy into mechanical energy. Removers ( retractors ), 
thrusters, dimple motors, etc, fall in this category. 

Adiabatic Ignition — Ignition of explosives and pyrotechnic system in 
which there is no virtual heat transfer. 

Adsorption — The adhesion in an extremely thin layer of molecules of 
gases or dissolved substances or of liquids to the surfaces of solid bodies 
with which they are in contact. 

Ageing of Explosives — Changes which may include physical, 
chemical and/or performance of explosives due to environmental con- 
ditions. 

Air-Blast — Shock wave transmitted through air. 

Air Gap Sensitivity Test ( Ardeer Double Cartridge, ADC Test ) 

— A test to determine the sensitivity of a charge of a receptor explosive to 
initiation by the donor charge separated by an air gap in line with the 
donor. 

Aluminium Block Expansion Test — A test similar to lead block 
expansion test but superior to it when testing brisance of explosives, 
especially those containing aluminium. 

Ammunition — Explosive substances when enclosed in any case or 
contrivance or otherwise adopted or prepared so as to form a cartridge 
or charge for small arms, guns, rockets or other weapons and components 
thereof such as caps, detonators, primers, boosters, fuses, shells, warheads, 
etc. 

AN-FO — An explosive based on ammonium nitrate and fuel oil. 

Approved ( Authorized ) — When used for explosives means approved 
( authorized ) by competent authority. 

ASA — An initiatory mixture containing lead azide, lead styphnate and 
aluminium powder. 

Available Energy — • Net useful energy of explosion released for doing 
work. 

B 

Back Break — Rock broken beyond the lines of drill hole, 

B & J Test ( Bergman Junk Test ) — A test for computing the stability 
of a propellant and nitro-cellulose by measuring the amount of nitrogen 
oxides evolved when a sample is heated at 132°C or 120''C for a pres- 
cribed period. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Bail Poivder — A propeiiant iti srnail and hard splierical form, generally 
used in small arms ammunition. 

Ballistic Mortar — A type of compound pendulum consisting of a 
heavy mortar suspended by a rigid frame of light aluminium plates on 
a knife edge used for ballistic mortar test for the measurement of 
the power of an explosive [ see 3.11 of IS : 6609 ( Part Il/Sec 1 )- 
1973» ]. 

Ballistic Pendulum — A compound pendulum propelled by the blast 

of an exnlosive fired from a standard cannon for determininer the oower 

" ~ " " 1" ... ^ ^ 

of an explosive, 

Ballistite — A high calorimetric value double base propellant usually in 
the form of flakes containing around 40 percent of nitroglycerine. 

Baratol — An explosive composed of barium nitrate and TNT. 

Base Charge ( in a Detanator ) — A high explosive charge which 
makes the major contribution to the power of the device. 

Base Charge ( of a Propellant ) — The principal component of the 
propellant charge. 

Bench Blasting — A method of blasting in open cast mines with vertical 
holes in levels or benches ( in the form of steps ). 

Berger ( Explosive ) — A blasting explosive mixture containing potas- 
sium chlorate, potassium bichromate, sugar and yellow wax in the 
proportions 61 : 6"1 ; 27 : 5"1. 

Berger Mixture — A smoke producing pyrotechnic composition based 
on zinc powder and chlorinated hydrocarbon. 

Binary Explosives — See ' Two-component explosives '. 

Bischel Bomb { Bischel Gauge ) — An equipment used to determine 
the pressure of explosion and to examine the products of detonation/ 
explosion. 

Blasjo Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Blast — Shock wave generated from the point of detonation which 
includes a shock front, a high pressure area behind the shock front and 
the following rarefaction. 

Blasting — A process of loosening rocks, minerals, etc, by explosives. 



♦Methods of test for commercial blasting explosives and accessories : Part II 
Explosives, Section 1 Explosives, general. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Blasting Agent — Any material or mixture consisting of a fuel and 
oxidizer intended for blasting not otherwise classified as an explosive and 
in which none of the ingredients is classified as explosive, provided the 
finished products, mixed and packed for use or shipment, cannot be 
detonated by a No. 8 blasting cap when unconfined. 

Blasting Cap — See ' Detonator '. 

Blasting Gelatine — A high explosive based on nitroglycerine con- 
sisting of about 92 percent nitroglycerine and about 8 percent nitrocel- 

Blasting Machine ( Hell Boxes ) — See ' Exploder '. 

Blasting Mat — A net-like structure made of rope, wire, or any other 
suitable material placed over a blasting site to prevent fly rocks. 

Blasting Powder { Gun Powder, Black Powder ) — A low explosive 
incorporating sodium/potassium nitrate, charcoal with and without 
sulphur. 

Blasting Ratio — Tonnes of rock blasted per kg of an explosive 
used. 

Blasting Soluble Nitrocellulose ( BSNC ) ™ A type of nitrocellulose 
used in the manufacture of gelatinous nitroglycerine-based explo- 
sives. 
Blister Shooting — See ' Mud capping ' or 'Blaster shooting '. 

Blown Shot — A shot which has not done any useful work on initiation 
in a blown-out shot. 

■o !_ \_ ]_,.:-,„ ,!„..: 1 c "l : A^^t-.^^.^^Urr^ ^(P^^+ U,, 

launching against a target. 

Booster — An intermediate high explosive charge in an ' explosive 
train ' which is easily initiated by a detonator or detonating fuse to 
detonate the main explosive charge completely ( same as 'Primer' ). 

Bore Hole ( Drill Hole ) — A prepared hole for the insertion of explo- 
sive charge. 

Bottom Charge — A charge loaded into the bottom of a drill hole. 

Box Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Bridge Wire — A resistance wire connected across t^vo lead wires, 

Brisance — Shattering power of an explosive as distinguished from its 
total work capacity; it indicates its ability to shatter and fragment 
hard structures and is dependent upon its velocity of detonation. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Brtska Detonator — A detonator in which extra strength is achieved 
with the same quantity of base charge by subjecting it to a much higher 
pressure. 

Bubble Energy — Energy contained in a bubble formed on detonation 
of an explosive charge under water, in other words, the gas pressure 
energy component of the total available energy of an explosive. 

Bubble Sensitization — Sensitization of an explosive charge by the 
adiabatic compression of entrapped gas bubbles. 

Bulk Loaded Explosive — Explosive directly loaded ( without a pro- 
tective wrapper ) into boreholes. 

Bulk Power — Power per unit volume of explosive. 

Bulled Hole — A bore hole with a chamber at the bottom which is 
formed by blasting a light charge of explosive to accommodate a large 
quantity of explosive {see ' Coyote blasting ' ). 

Bullet Impact Test — A test to determine the extent to which various 
ammunitions or explosives which are packed in regulation containers are 
safe against the effects of small arms fire. 

Bulling ( Chambering ) — A procedure intended to enlarge a section 
of a drill hole to obtain a greater concentration of explosive at that 
point. 

Burden ( Face Burden ) — The distance between the main body of the 
charge and the nearest free face. 

Burn Cut ( Shatter Cut ) — See under ' Cut '. 

Burning Rate — The linear regression of reaction zone measured per 
unit of time. Reciprocal of burning rate is the burning time. 

Bursting Time — The time from the application of energy to the 
bur£.ting of the detonator. 

Butt Hole ( Bottlog Socket ) — A portion of the borehole remaining 
in a face after firing of the charge. 



Cannon ( Standard Cannon ) — A heavy steel device used to fire 
charges for testing permitted explosives [ see 3.1.3 of IS : 6609 ( Part 11/ 
Sec2 )-1974*]. 

Cap — See ' Detonator ', ' Blasting cap '. 

•Methods of test for commercial blasting explosives rnd accesstries : Part II 
Explosives, Section 2 Explosives^ permitted. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Cap Sensitive — Any explosive composition which can be efficiently 
initiated by a commercial No. 6 detonator. 

Capped Fuse — A length of safety fuse with a plain detonator crimped 
onto one end. 

Cartridge — A preformed unit of explosive wrapped to a predetermined 
diameter and length. Also a round of small arm or gun ammunition. 
Also a type of military pyrotechnic store. 

Cast Explosives — Explosives which are melted and loaded by casting 
into a receptacle. 

Cavity ( Cavitation in Filled Explosives ) — An air space within 
filled explosive that usually results in non-uniform burning or premature 
bursting. 

Cavity Charge — See ' Hollow charge '. 

Chambering — See ' Bulling '. 

Characteristic Impedance of an Explosive — The product of 
density and optimum velocity of detonation of an explosive. 

Charge — A given quantity of an explosive filled in an ammunition or a 
shot hole. 

Charge Density — Quantity of explosive charge per unit length of the 
borehole. 

Charge Flash 

a) A readily ignitable explosive charge used in ignition elements of 
electric primers and detonators. 

b) A pyrotechnic charge used in flash producing items such as 
photo-flash cartridges, bombs or spotted devices. 

Charge Signal Ejection — An explosive device designed to eject a 
signal from an underwater mine, used for training. 

Charge Weight — Weight of explosives charged. 

Charging ( Loading ) — The act of placing the explosive in the desired 
position for blasting. 

Chemical Ammunition — Any ammunition containing casualty 
agents, riot control agents and incendiaries. 

Circuit — The wiring connecting electric detonator(s) to the source of 
power for initiating them. 

8 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Classification — The division of explosives into classes and divisions 
according to their general characteristics for storage and transporta- 
tion. 

fllavr f~lA«»1r / niovr Vfnar \ (~^1q\; nliKT iie*»r1 ff\r <it cum m\rtV 

■^^..j ww« ^ ^.^j - «.{, J J ^ — J-, — ".- o- 

Collar — The space left on the top of the explosive charge in a bore- 
hole. 

Collar-Prixning — Priming of the main expolsives column in such a 
way that detonation is initiated at the primer near the collar. 

Column Loading — The charging of a borehole with a train of ex- 
plosive. 

r^nmna^ihlt-ifv — TJip rtWi]\tv rtf n suhstanrf r\r n rAmbinatinn of snbs- 

tances to remain indefinitely in contact with an explosive without any 
adverse physical and/or chenvical effects on each other. 

Confined Shots — Charges fired under confined conditions. 

Confinement • — The degree of restraint exerted on the explosive charge 

hv thp! surroundinD' material. 

._ ^ — . _... — .^-j _ .. 

Connector for Ignitor Cord — These are used to provide a connection 
between the end of the safety fuse and the ignitor cord. 

Continuity of Detonation ( COD ) — The property of an explosive to 
propagate detonation along the explosives column over a length of 1 m 
from the point of initiation. 

Cordite — Double based propellant in the form of cords. 

Ccromunt Cut — Sef under ' Cut '. 

Coyote Blasting — See ' Bulled hole '. 

Grater — A denression m the ground caused by an explosion. 

Crimper — A hand tool used for crimping a detonator onto a safety 
fuse. 

Crimping Machine — - A machine used to crimp detonators to the 
igniting device. 

Crimping Station ( Capping Station ) — A special room or build- 
ing used for preparing capped fuses. 

V^niiA^MA A'JmUACLdL J. lie: iiiiiiiiiiuiii taiuiiiv-ivi ut. v* iiii^ii ait ^A|^it^^iw^ 

column when initiated propagates detonation over the entire column. 

Crushed Zone — The zone of rock surrounding the borehole which is 
crushed by tlie blasting of an explosive charge. 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Cushion Blasting — A technique of blasting using space cartridges 
( see also ' Perimeter blasting ', ' Smooth blasting ' ). 

Cut — An arrangement to provide a free face at the time of blasting an 
explosive. 

The different types of cut employed in simultaneous blasting are 
under-cut, middle-cut, over-cut and side-cut. These are defined as 
follows : 

Under-Cut — provided at the floor level of the rock face. 
Middle-Cut — provided in the middle portion of the rock face. 
Over-Cut — provided at the roof level of the rock face. 
Side-Cut — provided vertically on any side of the rock face. 

The different types of cut employed in delay blasting are ; drag- 
cut, fan- cut, wedge- cut, blasjo-cut, pyramid or diamond-cut, burn-cut 
and coromunt cut. These are defined as follows: 

Drag-Cut — A cut in which shot holes are angled in a vertical 
plane. 

Fan-Cut — A cut in which shot holes are angled in a horizontal 
plane. 

Wedge-Cut — A cut in which a wedge is formed either vertically or 
horizontally by pairs of holes drilled at about 60° to the 
face and meeting or finishing close to each other at the 
back of the cut. 

Blasjo-Cut — A wedge cut in the horizontal plane in which the pair 
of shot holes one on each side of the face has between 
them an angle of 30', with the trimmers at the top and 
bottom levels of the face. 

Pyramid or Diamond-Cut — A cut consisting of a group of shot 
holes drilled from the periphery of a core to meet at a 
point which forms the back of the cut. 

Burn-Cut ( Shatter-Cut ) — A cut comprising a cluster of shot holes 
drilled approximately at right angles to the face and 
placed close to each other and parallel throughout 
their length, with one or more holes left empty in the 
vicinity of the charged holes, thus forming additional 
free face to relieve the burden on the charge holes. 

10 



IS : 10081 • 1981 

Box-Gut — A burn -cut in the pattern of a square or rectangle with 
one or more empty holes interspersed. 

Line-Gut — A burn-cut in the pattern of a straight line with ahernate 
charged and uncharged holes. 

Goromunt-Cut — A cut comprising a cluster of parallel shot-holes 
drilled approximately at right angles to the face and 
placed close to each other with one or more empty centre 
holes which are actually two holes drilled close together 
and slightly over-lapping each other. 

Cut Off — A condition of a hole charged with explosive which has been 
partially sheered off by the blast of the previous shot. 

Catting Charge — A charge of explosive applied to the outside of an 
object with the aim of cutting or sheering it off. 



Dead Pressed — An explosive pressed to such an extent as to lead to 
loss in sensitivity to detonation. 

Deck Charges ( Deck Loading ) — Charges placed above a base 
charge at pre-selected intervals and which are separated from the base 
charge and each other by sand or other spacing materials. 

Decoupling — The extent of air space left between the explosiv-e charge 
and the inside wall of the borehole. 

Deflagration — Brisk burning of an explosive without detonation. 

DEGN ( EGDN ) — Abbreviation for diethylene glycol dinitrate. 

Delay — A pyrotechnic item mostly of relatively slow reaction time 
( in mm per s ), suitable for timing sequence of events ( see ' train ' ). 

Delay Detonator — A detonator which functions at a predetermined 
delay after the application of energy. 

Delay Detonator Relays or Detonating Relays — A component of 
high explosive train which introduces a delay in the time of functioning 
of the detonating fuse. 

Delay Element — ■ A component which provides a specific delay in the 
detonator, fuse, etc. 

Delay Interval — The interval expressed in time between initiation and 
detonation of the bursting charge. 

Densifi cation — To increase the density of an explosive composition. 

11 



IS X 10181 - 1981 

Desensitizatxon — Desensitization { oi- phlegmatizalion ) of an explo- 
sive means rendering it insensitive or less sensitive to heat, shock, impact, 
percussion, rifle bullet or friction. 

Detonating Cord ( Detonating Fuse ) — Essentially a small round 
core of high explosive covered with a protective sheath to propagate a 
detonating impulse. 

Detonation — An exothermic chemical reaction in which the advancing 
reaction zone in the explosive column is preceded by a shock wave. 

Detonation Front ( Detonation Head ) — The envelope produced by 
a shock wave detonating an explosive charge. 

Detonation Pressure — Pressuz-e exerted at the detonation front. 

Detonation Trap — A device which arrests further propagation of 
detonation front. 

Detonation Velocity — The rate of advance of the reaction zone is 
termed detonation velocity or rate ( see VOD ). 

Detonator — A device to start an explosive process. 

Detonator No. 6 — Standard detonators which when tested by sand 
bomb test as prescribed in IS : 6609 ( Part III )-I973* give the folloiving 
quantity of crushed sand: 

a) Percentage of sand passing through 500-micron IS sieve not 

less than 35. 

b) Percentage of sand passing through 250-micron IS sieve not 

more than 30. 

Detonator No. 8 — Standard detonators which when tested by the 
sand bomb test as prescribed in IS : 6609 { Part III )-1975* give the 
following quantity of crushed sand : 

a) Percentage of sand passing through 500-micron IS sieve not 

less than 50. 

b) Percentage of sand passing through 250-micron IS sieve not 

more than 45. 

Diamond Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Direct Initiation — Initiation of a column of explosive from the 
mouth of the borehole. 



'Methods of test for commercial blasting explosives and accessories : Part III 
Detonators, general and permitted. 

12 



IS t 10081 - 1981 

'Do'wn Line Propagation — Px-opagation of detonation in a column o f 
explosive charge with the initiating device spread along the length of the 
explosive column down the borehole. 

Drag Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Drifting — One of the methods in stoneblasting In coal mines. Th e 
principles involved are similar to those of tunnelling. 

Drilling — Operation of making boreholes for leading explosive 
charges. 

Dry Blasting Agent/Explosive — ■ A powder explosive generally con- 
sisting of ammonium nitrate as the major ingredient with no explouva 
sensitizer. 

Dynamite — Originally referred to nitroglycerine absorbed in klesel- 
guhr but now extended to other high explosive compositions based on 
nitroglycerine. 

Dynamite Gelatine — Explosives based on a gelatinized mixture of NG 
and NG with other additives. These are also known as gelatines or 
gelignites. Some gelatine NG/NG mixtures are also i-eferred to as 
dynamites in continental countries. 

Dynamite, IF, F { Low Freezing ) — High explosive composition based 
on nitroglycerine as sensitizer Avith other liquid explosive such as DNT, 
EGDN, etc, to serve for lowering freezing point of nitroglycerine. 



Electric Detonator ( Electric Cap ) — A detonator having electrical 
means of ignition. 

Electric Lighters ( for Igniters ) ~ Specially a slotted connector 
containing a pyrotechnic composition for attachment to igniter cord and 
which is initiated electrically to ignite the cord. 

f Electric Storm — A storm which may include an electrostatic charge. 

Electro-Explosive Devices — Devices consisting of a charge of explo- 
sive in contact with an electro-explosive transducer. 

Emulsion Explosive — An explosive in the form of emulsion. 

Excitation Time — The minimum period of time ( usually of the 
order of milliseconds ) for which the detonator fuse-head should be 
subjected to the current impulse passing through the bridgewire for 
ignition of the fusehead. 

Exploder — A device which supplies electrical energy for initiating 
electric detonators. 

13 



IS } 10081 - 1981 

Explosion — Liberation of energy sufficiently sudden to cause dynamic 
stress to the surroundings. 

Explosion Pressure — Pressure developed on explosion. 

Explosive — A material or mixture of materials which w hen initiated 
undergoes a rapid chemical change with the development of heat 
and high pressure. Explosives are broadly divided into two main 
classes. 

a) Low Explosive — A class of explosives which do not detonate but 
rather generate a large amount of gas and heat when ignited. 
Normally pyrotechnics and propellants fall under this class. 

b) High Explosives — A class of explosives which detonate when 
suitably initiated and are characterised by high rate of reaction 
and pressure. 

Explosive Column — A train of explosive charges. 

Explosive Limit — A limit imposed by the statutory authority 
specifying the quantity of explosive that can be handled/stored or 
transported. 

Explosive Primary — An explosive which explodes or detonates on 
flDnlJration of small external enerev Droduced bv friction, imnact. flame 
or heat ( see 'Initiatory Explosives' ). 

Explosive Secondary — A term applied to a few high explosives 
which are not as sensitive as the primary explosives but are more sensitive 
to initiation by the primary explosives. They are used as booster or 
exploder charges, for example, tetryl, PETN. 

Explosive Strength — Strength of an explosive expressed as the per- 
centage equivalent of blasting gelatine which is arbitrarily given a value 
of 100 percent. This definition may not be applicable for all types of 
explosives. 

Explosive Switch — A self-contained electrically initiated small unit 
that causes one or more electric circuits to be opened and/or closed by 
explosive action. 

Explosive Train — A series of explosive charges specially arranged to 
produce a desired outcome of detonation or explosion. 

Exudation — The appearance of oily liquid on the inside or outside of 

F 



an ex'i^losive 



Face Burden — See ' Burden '. 

14 



IS I 10081 - 1981 

Fall Hammer — An equipment to assess the sensitiveness of an explosive 
to impact. 

Fan Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Fire Damp Emission — A continuous evolution o^ methane ( called 
fire damp ) in coal mine workings. 

Firing — The act of initiating an explosive. 

Firing Gable — Insulated wires to connect the shots to be fired to the 
source of energy to be used. 

Firing Circuit — Electrical circuits which may be in series, parallel, 
series-parallel or parallel-series obtained by connecting detonator lead 
wire in various ways. 

Firing Device — See ' Exploder ', ' Mains Firing '. 

Flammability — Susceptibility of a substance to ignition and sustained 
combustion. 

Flammability Range — The difference between the minimum and 
maximum percentage by volume of the gas in mixture with air that 
forms a flammable mixture. 

Flares — A pyrotechnic ammunition designed to produce a single source 
of intense light for relatively long durations for target or air-field illumi- 
nation or for signalling and other purposes. 

Fly rocks — Rocks thrown at an excessive distance from the blasting 

site. 

Fragmentation — The extent to which the blasted material is shattered 

into small fraginents. The size distribution of the blasted material in 

the muck pile after the blast. 

Freezing and Thawing Test — A test in which samples of NG-based 
explosives are subjected to alternate freezing and storage at room tempe- 
rature to see if any gel breakdown occurs. 

Friction Sensitivity — Sensitivity of explosive to initiation by fric- 
tion. 

Frictional Impact Test ( Torpedo Friction Test ) — Test of 
explosives for sensitivity to impact and friction simultaneously. 

Fume Characteristics — Characteristics (mainly toxicity) of post 
detonation fumes of explosives. 

Fuse — A slow burning device designed to initiate an explosive system 
on being subjected to one of the actions such as ignition, stab, percussion 
or friction. 

15 



IS : lOOSl • 1981 

Fuse Detonating — See ' Detonating cord '. 

Fuse Head — An electrical ignition device, without lead wires. 

Fuse Ignitor — A pyrotechnic device which burns with a very hot 
jetting flame and is used to ensure ready ignition of safety fuse. 



Gallery Test — A standard test for studying the safety of explosives for 
general application in underground coal mines. 

Gap Sensitivity — 5"^!? ' Air gap sensitivity '. 

Gap Test — See ' Air gap sensitivity test '. 

Gasless Composition — A pyrotechnic material that reacts with 
release of very small amount of gaseous products. 

Gelatinous Explosive — An explosive consisting of gelatinized mix- 
ture of nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine and other additives. 

Gerbe — A pyrotechnic device usually with 20 mm inside diameter from 
which a jet or spray of fire issues. 

Grit Sensitivity — The sensitivity of an explosive to initiation in the 
presence of grit. 

Gun Powder — See ' Blasting powder ', ' Black powder '. 

H 

Halved Cartridge Test — An air gap sensitivity test in whicli the explo- 
sive cartridge is cut into two halves to make a donor and a receptor and 
the cut ends face each other. 

Hang Fire — A charge which fires later than intended where a deflagra- 
tion stage precedes the explosion. 

Heat of Explosion — The heat evolved when a substance ( explosive ) 
is exploded in the absence of oxygen. 

Heat Test — See ' Abel heat test '- 

Heave ( Throw ) — The extent to which the broken mass of the rock is 
thrown from its original location. 

Hess Test — Lead block compression test £or the determination of 
brisance of an explosive. 

High Explosive HE — See under ' Explosive '. 

16 



IS 1 10081 - 1981 

Hollow Charge/Shaped Charge — A charge incorporated with a 
cavity to produce what is known as 'cavity effect' or ' Munroe effect '. 

Hot Spots — High temperature spots produced in a layer of explosive 
arising out of impact, friction or adiabatic compression of entrapped gas 
bubbles. 



Igniter — A cartridge or a charge with an initiating device. 

Igniter Cord — A cord which burns at a faster rate than that of the 
safety fuse and which is used to ignite a number of safety fuses in 
sequence. 

Igniter Cord Connectors — Slotted and recessed metal tubes contain- 
ing a pyrotechnic composition which are used to connect igniter cord to 
safety fuse. 

Illuminating Flare — A military device containing a pyrotechnic 
composition ( usually illuminating ) comprising mixtures based on finely 
powdered substances like aluminium and magnesium, compressed into 
the form of a candle. 

Impact Sensitivity — Sensitivity of explosive to initiation by impact 
( see ' Call hammer ' ). 

Incendiary — A substance used for destructive ignition. 

Incendivity — The degree to which an explosive is prone to ignite gas 
mixtures or coal dust in a statutory test. 

Induction Time — In firing electric detonators, the time between the 
breaking of the fuse wire and the detonation of the base charges. 

Initiating Efficiency — Ability of an initiator, primer or booster, to 
reliably detonate a high explosive charge. 

Initiation — To start an explosive reaction by means of a spark, heat, 
impact, friction or a Shockwave. 

Initiator — First element of an explosive or pyrotechnic train normally 
containing a small amount of primary explosive. 

Initiatory Explosive — A primary explosive alone or in combination 
with other ingredients used for setting off a secondary explosive usually 
in a detonator system. 

Instantaneous Fuse — A fuse which propagates by burning a't high 
velocity. 

17 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Inverse Initiation — Initiation of an explosive column from the back 
of the borehole. 

K 

Kast Brisance Meter — An apparatus for measuring the Lrisancc by 
compression ( crushing ) of a copper cylinder. 



Lag Time — Time interval between the application of energy to an 
electric detonator and the breaking of its electric circuit. 

Lances — Paper tubes of light construction measiring 6 to 9 mm dia 
and 50 to 75 mm length filled with coloured fire composition, which is 
charged into the tube by temping only. These are used in set pieces, 
attached to a wooden framewoik and are meant to produce outlines 
of the figures of the desired pattern such as a flag, words, etc. 

Lanyard — A chord or cable for setting off a firing mechanism from a 
distance. 

Lead Block Test ( Trauzl Lead Block Test ) — A method of measur- 
ing the power of an explosive by tlie expansion caused in the cavity of a 
lead block after firing a charge of explosive. 

Lead Plate Test — A test which is employed for testing the strength of 
detonators. 

Lead Wires ( Leg l/Vires ) — Insulated wires permanently attached to 
electric detonators. 

Leakage Resistance — Leakage of current due to insiifficient insulation 
resistance of the wire leading to the shot. 

Line Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Liquid Oxygen Explosive ( LOX ) — Charged prepared by soaking 
an absorbent cartridge made of combustible ingredients in liquid 
oxygen. 

Liquefaction — Segregation of liquid present in the explosive including 
segregation of liquefiable oxidizer salts in the explosives by extraneous 
agencies such as moisture pick up. 

Loading — Filling of blast holes with explosives. 

Loading Density — Charge per unit length of borehole in mining 
practice. 

Loading Pattern — Pattern of loading explosives into the blast holes. 

18 



IS t 10081 - 1981 

Low Explosive — See under ' Explosives '. 

liOW Freeze Explosive ( Polar Explosive ) — A nitroglycerine based 
explosive incorporating a low freeze mixture of nitroglycerine and ethylene 
glycol dinitrate ( EGDN ) with or without other antifreezing ingre- 
dients. 

M 

Magazine — An approved store which is exclusively appi^opriated to the 
keeping of explosives. 

Magazine Shoes — Shoes specially made without iron/steel in the soles 
and heels for wearing in magazines. 

Mains Firing — Firing of explosives by energising the mains circuit 
from mains of electric supply. 

Match — Cotton ivicking impregnated with gunpowder, used for conve- 
ying fire to a piece or parts of pyrotechnical devices* 

Match Fuse — A stick of match fuse safety consisting of a firm solid 
cigar shaped bulb of a smouldering composition or compositions formed 
over a layer of inert material around one end of a wooden splinter, 
chemically treated to merely char but not burst into flame on heating. 

Mats ( Blasting ) — See ' Blasting mat '. 

Methyl Violet Test — A test for stability of propellant ( single based 
and double based ) by measurement of time required for oxides of 
nitrogen to be evolved by thermal decomposition under specified condi- 
tions and change in the colour of methyl violet paper to bright salmon 
pink. 

Middle Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Mine ( Explosives ) — An encased explosive or chemical charge placed 
in position so that it detonates when its target touches or moves near it 
or when it is touched by remote control. 

Minimum Booster — Minimum quantity of booster required for reli- 
able detonation of a non-cap sensitive explosive charge. 

Misfire — A charge or a part of charge which for any reason fails to 
detonate. 

Mud Capping — See ' Plaster shooting '. 

MufSed Blasting — A method of blasting to prevent fly rocks. 

Multiple Fuse Igniter — A device for igniting many lengths of safety 
fuse simultaneously by means of a master fuse. 

19 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Munroe E£Fect ( Cavity Energy Effect ) — The axial reinforcement 
of waves in a particular direction as a result of explosion. 

Muzzle Burst — Explosion of a projectile near or at the muzzle of a 
weapon. 

Muzzle Flash — Flame at the muzzle of a gun after a projectile leaves 
the barrel. 

Muzzle Velocity — The velocity of a projectile at the muzzle end, 

N 

Napalm — Aluminium soap in powder form, gelatinized in gasoline for 
use in bombs of flame throwers. 

NC — Nitrocellulose. 

NCN — Nitrocarbonitraie. 

NCN Blasting Agent — A, blasting agent either in powder or slurry 
form based essentially on nitrocarbonitrates. 

NG — Nitroglycerine. 

Nitrous Fumes — Fumes containing various oxides of nitrogen. 

Non-electric Delay Detonators — Delay detonators containing non- 
electric means of initiation. 

Non-incendive Short Period Delay Detonators — Specially designed 
detonators for use in gassy and dusty coal mines. 

Non-permitted Explosive — Explosives whose use is not permitted 
for blasting in underground gassy and dusty coal mines. 

O 

Obturate — To seal an explosive device to prevent explosive gas in a 
particular direction. 

Ogive — A curved or front section of a projectile or signal. 

Ordinary Detonator — •S'^^ ' Plain detonator '. 

Ordnance — Large size military guns and mortars. 

Over-cut — See under ' Gut '. 

Overdrive — High energy initiation of the explosive column. 

Oxidizer — A substance that furnishes the reactant oxygen. 

Oxygen Balance — Oxygen content relative to the total oxygen required 
for the complete oxidation of all oxidizable material. 

20 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

P 

PAD — Propellant actuated device formerly CAD ( cartridge actuated 
device ). 

Partial Detonation — Incomplete detonation. 

Pattern ( of Blasting ) — A dimensional plan of holes to be drilled for 
blasting a face. 

Pentalite — Mixture of PETN and TNT. 

PETN — Pentaei-ythritol tetranitrate. 

Percussion Primer — A saTiall capsule containing primary explosives 
initiated by a firing pin. 

Perimeter Blasting — The firing of lightly charged perimeter holes 
either prior to or at the same time as the main blast ( see ' Cushion blast- 
ing \ ' Smooth blasting ' and ' Pre-splitting ' ). 

Permitted Detonator — A specially designed detonator for use in gassy 
and dusty coal mines. 

Permitted Explosive — A specially designed explosive suitable for 
use in gassy and dusty coal mineSj which has passed certain statutory 
tests. 

Phelgmatization — See ' Desensitization '. 

Picrite — Nitroguanidine. 

Plain Detonator — A metal tube closed at one end, charged with the 
initiating explosive consolidated under pressure, and left open at the other 
end. It is intended for use with safety fuse. 

Plaster Shooting — Also known as ' Secondary blasting ' and ' Mud 
capping '. It is a technique where explosive charges are blasted on the 
rock surface without drilling any holes. The charge is usually covered 
by mud or clay, and hence the name ' Mud capping '. 

Plastic Explosive — An explosive having plastic properties which can 
be moulded to the desired shape. 

Polar Explosive — See ' Low freeze explosives '. 

Pop ( Popping, Pop Shooting ) — The breaking of rocks by firing a 
small charge within holes which have been drilled into them. 

Post-detonation Fumes — Fumes generated by blasting of explosives. 

Powder Explosive — Explosive in powder form. 

21 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Powderman { Powder Monkey, Shot Firer ) — See ' Shot firer '. 

Powder Van — A covered van specially designed to carry an explosive 
safely ( also called ' Explosive van ' ). 

Power — A measure of the amount of energy released by an explosive 
on detonation and hence of its ability' to do useful work ( same as 
' Strength ', * Weight strength ' ). 

Power Factor — See ' Blasting ratio '. 

Premature Explosion/Detonation — An explosion \\ hich occurs 
earlier than it is intended. 

Primer — See ' Booster '- 

Priming Charge — In detonator manufacture, the charge of initiating 
explosive. 

Propellant — An explosive whicli by its regularity of burning produces 
sustained pressure in the bore of a gun for imparting acceleration to the 
projectile. 

Pyramid Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Pyrotechnic — An explosive containing combustible materials for the 
production of flame, heat, light, smoke or sound. 

R 

RDX — Cyclotrimethylene trinitramine ( also known as ' Cyclonite 
Hexogen' ). The origin of the word is * Research Department Explo- 
sive '. 

Reflection Shooting — A method of seismic prospecting in which 
charges are fired singly or in multiples to get reflected seismic signals. 

Refraction Shooting — A method of seismic prospecting in which 
heavy charges of explosives are fired for obtaining refracted signals. 

Relays — See ' Delay detonator relays ' . 

Ripping — ■ In coal mining, the removal of stone after recovery of coa 1 
to produce a road of normal size. The operation is commonly associated 
with longwall method of mining coal. 

Rotational Firing ( Sequence Firing ) — The firing of charges in 
predetermined order. 

22 



IS : 10081 - 1981 



Safety Distance 

a) Inside ( ISD ) — The distance between a building or stack con- 
taining explosives and other such building or stacks inside an 
enclosed explosive area which will prevent the immediate direct 
propagation of explosion or fire from one to the other by missile, 
flame or blast. 

b) Outside ( OSD ) — The distance between a building or stack 
containing explosives and other buildings, railways, waterways, 
and main roads outside an enclosed explosive area beyond which 
ignition or explosion of explosives or dangerous goods will not 
cause severe structural damage to the building, etc, or serious 
physical injury to persons. 

Safety Fuse — A fuse for blasting which burns and does not explode 
and which does not contain its own means of ignition, and which is of 
such strength and construction and contains an explosive in such quantity 
that the burning of such fuse would not communicate laterally with other 
like fuses. 

Salamander Blasting — A blasting technique used to remove sala- 
mander or solidified slag from blast furnances. 

Sand Bomb Test ( Sand Test ) — A test to assess the strength of a 
detonator in terms of crushing of sand in a closed chamber. 

Secondary Blasting — A process of breaking, with explosives, boulders 
from an initial blast which are too large for immediate handling ( see 
* Blaster shooting ' ). 

Seismic Explosives — Specially designed explosives used for seismic 
prospecting. 

Sensitivity — Susceptibility of an explosive or pyrotechnic component 
to react to external stimuli. 

Shaped Charges — An explosive charge designed to produce specific 
effects by the inclusion of a re-entrant conical or V-shape usually lined 
with naetal. 

Sheet Explosive — An explosive in the form of a sheet. 

Shelf Life — Length of time in storage during which an item will 
remain in serviceable condition. 

Shock Wave — A compression wave caused by sudden rise In pressure 
due to release of a large quantity of gaseous products at high temperature 
resulting from decomposition of the explosive material. 

23 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

Short Firing — The firing of explosive charges. 

Shot Delay ( Detonators ) — A delay detonator with functioning time 
of the order of milliseconds. 

Shot Firer — A person who is authorized and licenced to prepare 
explosive charges and carry out blast operations ( same as * Powderman ', 
* Powder monkey' ). 

Shot Firing Gables ( Leads ) — See' Firing cable ' . 
Side-cut — see under 'Cut'. 

Signal Pistol — A single shot pistol designed to project pyrotechnic 
signals. 

Single Base Propellant — Propellant based on nitrocellulose only. 

Slurry Blasting Agents ( SBA ) — See'^ Blasting agents '. 

Slurry Explosives ( SE ) — An explosive made by sensitizing a thick- 
ened slurry of oxidizing salts, fuels and other ingredients ( same as 
' Water gel explosives ' ). 

Smooth Blasting — A method for firing holes in such a manner as to 
avoid excessive fracturing with the aim of preserving a smooth outline 
( see also ' Cushion blasting ', ' Perimeter blasting ' ). 

Socket — A partially blasted shot hole containing undetonated explo- 
sive. 

Solid Blasting — Blasting any solid rock face when only one free face 
is available. 

Note — This method is not limited only to blasting of coal but applies to all type!> 
of rocks. 

Sound Signal — See ' Acoustic warning '. 

Spacers — Non-explosive material ( for example, wood, ceramic ) inter- 
posed between charges to extend the column of explosives. 

Spacing — The linear distance between the collars of drill holes. 

Spalling — The breaking off of a scab of material from a free face as a 
result of the reflection of shock waves. 

Spontaneous Ignition — Ignition occurring without external energy 
input. 

Sporting Powder — Powder used for filling of cartridges with a nitro- 
cellulose propellant. 

Squib — An electrically fired igniter. 

24 



IS ; 10081 - 1981 

Stamping — The process of filling up holes with sand, day, soil, etc, 
after they have been charged with explosive. 

Star — A pyrotechnic light signal of short duration ( but not a flash ) 
that burn as a speck of light in the air. 

Steady State Velocity — Steady velocity attained by an explosive 

charge after an initial peak pressure. 

Stray Currents — The leakage currents from the electrically operated 
equipment, current conductors, etc, that may energize the electric shot- 
firing circuit resulting in accidental detonation. 

Strength — See ' Power ', 'Weight strength '. 

Streaming Velocity — The velocity of the products of detonation in 
the direction of travel of the detonation wave. 

Sympathetic Detonation — Detonation of an explosive charge caused 
by explosion of another charge not in contact. 



Tamping — The act of consolidating explosives or stemming in the 
drill hole. 

TNT — Trinitrotoluene. 

Toe Blasting — A technique of blasting to avoid toe formation in bench 
blasting. 

Torpedo Friction Test — See ' Friction test ', 

Train — see ' Delay '. 

Trauzl Test ~ See ' Lead block test '. 

Trunk Line — The main line of detonating fuse to which branch lines 
are connected. 

Two>component Explosive — Generally refers to an explosive obtained 
by mixing two components, where neither of the two components is an. 
explosive by itself ( also known as ' Binary Explosives ' }, 

U 

Under-Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Underwater Blasting — Blasting of explosive under water. 

25 



IS : 10081 - 1981 

V 

Vacuum Stability — Test for determination of stability of explosives. In 
this test, the thermal decomposition of a sample is followed by observing 
the rise in pressure of the gases given off in vacuum. 

Verey Pistol — A popular but obsolete term for a pistol shaped firing 
device for pyrotechnic cartridges, now called ' Pyrotechnic pistol '. 

VOD — Velocity of detonation ( See ' Detonation velocity ' ). 

W 

Watergel Explosives — see ' Slurry explosives '. 

Water Stemming — Stemming done using water column in a bore- 
hole. 

Wedge-Cut — See under ' Cut '. 

Weight Strength — See ' Power of explosives '. 



26 



