**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 15033 (2001) : Manipulating Industrial Robots - EMC Test 
Methods and Performance Evaluation Criteria - Guidelines 
[PGD 18: Industrial and Production Automation Systems and 
Robotics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1815033:2001 
ISO/TR 11062: 1994 

//7Gf/an Standard 

MANIPULATING INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS — EMC 
TEST METHODS AND PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATION CRITERIA — GUIDELINES 



ICS 25.040.30 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



/Augusf2001 Price Group 7 



Industrial and Production Automation Systems and Robotics Sectional Committee, BP 18 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 'Manipulating industrial robots — 
EMC test methods and performance evaluation criteria — Guidelines' issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the 
recommendations of Industrial and Production Automation Systems and Robotics Sectional 
Committee (BP 18) and approval of the Basic and Production Engineering Division Council. 

This standard which is identical with this standard does not include the development of individual 
standards themselves but rather the establishment of common frame work, in terms of a reference 
model to assist future standards developments. 

The text of the ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations up to Page 14 of ISO Standard. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards, Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words Technical Report' appear referring to this standard, they should be read 
as Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard while in Indian 
Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In the adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian 
Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place 
are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International Standard 

ISO 8373:1994 Manipulating industrial 
robots — Vocabulary 
ISO 9283:1990 Manipulating industrial 
robots — Performance criteria and 
related testing methods 
lEC CISPR Publication 11:1990 Limits 
and methods of measurement of radio 
interference characteristics of infor- 
mation technology equipment 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS 14662:1999 Industrial robots — 

Vocabulary 

IS 14533:1998 Manipulating industrial 

robots — Performance criteria and 

related test method 

IS 6873 (Part 4):1977 Method of 

measurements of electromagnetic 

interference: Part 4 Industrial scientific 

and medical (ISM) radio frequency 

equipment and microwave equipment 

for heating and therapeutic apparatus 



Degree of 

Equivalence 

Identical 

do 



Technically 
Equivalent 



At present there is no Indian Standard on project covered under lEC 1000-1-1, lEC 1000-4-1 and 
lEC CISPR Publication 22:1985. The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this 
standard has reviewed the provisions of the above mentioned ISO/lEC Standards and decided about 
the acceptables for use in conjunction with this standard. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off the numerical values [revised)'. The number of significant 
places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

MANIPULATING INDUSTRIAL ROBOTS — EMC 
TEST METHODS AND PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATION CRITERIA — GUIDELINES 



1 Scope 

This Technical Report provides guidelines on how to 
apply the already existing Electronnagnetic Compati- 
bility (EMC) International Standards for testing electro- 
magnetic influences on the performance of mani- 
pulating industrial robots. 

The existing EMC Standards do not specifically 
address test methods for robots and the intention of 
this Technical Report is to define appropriate testing 
procedures for robots in their normal working 
environment and applications and to provide guidance 
for the evaluation of the test results. 

In addition, these guidelines are useful for evaluating 
the safety of manipulating industrial robots affected 
by electromagnetic disturbances. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this Technical Report. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
Technical Report are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below. Members of lEC and ISO 
maintain registers of currently valid International 
Standards. 

ISOyTR 8373:1994, Manipulating industrial robots — 
Vocabulary, 

ISO 9283: 1 990, Manipulating industrial robots — 
Performance criteria and related testing methods. 

ISO 9283: 1 990/Amd. 1 : 1 991 , Manipulating industrial 
robots — Performance criteria and related testing 
methods — Amendment 1: Guide for selection of the 
performance criteria for typical robotic applications, 

lEC 1000-1-1:1992, Electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC) — Part 1: General — Section 1: Application and 
interpretation of fundamental definitions and terms. 



I EC 1 000-4-1 : 1 992, Electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC) — Part 4: Testing and measuring techniques — 
Section 1: Overview of immunity tests. 

lECCISPR Publication 11:1990, Limits and methods 
of measurement of electromagnetic disturbance 
characteristics of industrial, scientific and medical 
(ISM) radio-frequency equipment. 

lECCISPR Publication 22:1985, Limits and methods 
of measurement of radio interference characteristics 
of information technology equipment 



3 Definitions 

For the purposes of this Technical Report, the 
definitions given in ISO/TR 8373 and lEC 1000-1-1. 
and the following definitions, apply. 

3.1 manipulating industrial robot; robot: Auto- 
matically controlled, reprogrammable, multi-purpose, 
manipulative machine with several degrees of 
freedom, which may be either fixed in place or mobile 
for use in industrial automation applications. 

3.2 electromagnetic environment: Totality of elec- 
tromagnetic phenomena existing at a given location. 

3.3 electromagnetic disturbance: Any electro- 
magnetic phenomenon which may degrade the 
performance of a device, equipment or system. 

3.4 electromagnetic interference; EMI: Degra- 
dation of the performance of a device, transmission 
channel or system caused by an electromagnetic 
disturbance. 

NOTE 1 Disturbance and interference are respectively 
cause and effect. 



3.5 electromagnetic compatibility; EMC: Ability of 
equipment or system to function satisfactorily in its 
electromagnetic environment without introducing 
intolerable disturbances to anything in that envi- 
ronment. 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



3.6 (electromagnetic) compatibility level: Speci- 
fied maximum electromagnetic disturbance level 
expected to be impressed on a device, equipment or 
system operating in particular conditions. 

NOTE 2 In practice the electromagnetic compatibility level 
is not an absolute maximum level but may be exceeded by 
a small probability. 



3.7 (electromagnetic) emission: Phenomenon by 
v\/hich electromagnetic energy emanates from a 
source. 

3.8 immunity (to a disturbance): Ability of a 
device, equipment or system to perform without 
degradation in the presence of an electromagnetic 
disturbance. 

3.9 (electromagnetic) susceptibility: Inability of a 
device, equipment or system to perform without 
degradation in the presence of an electromagnetic 
disturbance- 

NOTE 3 Susceptibility is a lack of immunity. 



4 Units of measurement 

The. units of measurement adopted in this Technical 
Report are in accordance with ISO 9283 and 
ISO 9946. 

In addition, unless otherwise stated, all quantities in 
EMC are given in SI units, their decimal multiples or 
submultiples. 

NOTE 4 The level difference of a field is defined as 1 dB 
(decibel) when 10 Ig — ^-1 where IV-i and W2 are 

amplitudes of that field. 

If W^ and VV^2 ^f© electrical power levels, a level difference 

of 1 dB may also be defined as when 20lg— L = l or 

^2 

20 Ig — J- = 1 where V] and V2 are voltages measured over 
A2 

the same impedance and /4i and A2 are currents measured 

over the same impedance. 



5 Requirements for the testing conditions 



5.1 Environmental conditions 

The environmental conditions adopted as reference 
for testing activities shall be reported. Any changes of 
settled environmental parameters shall be made in 
accordance with the manufacturer and included in the 
test report. 



The recommended values of the typical environmental 
parameters controlled in a laboratory (temperature, 
atmospherical pressure and relative humidity) are 
based on IEC801. 

The climatic conditions shall be maintained at the 
following values during EMC tests: 

a) ambient temperature of between 1 5 *'C and 35 °C; 

b) relative humidity of between 10% and 75% 
(between 30 % and 60 % during the electrostatic 
discharge test); 

c) atmospheric pressure of between 86 kPa and 
106 kPa (between 860 mbar and 1 060 mbar). 

Electromagnetic environment conditions shall not 
influence the test results. 

Electromagnetic emission measurements, particularly 
those ones related to the radiated field emitted by the 
robot (radiated emission tests), are normally perfor- 
med in electromagnetically screened anechoic rooms 
in accordance with the standard requirements 
regarding the usage of a test site free from objects 
reflecting the electromagnetic field in the measure- 
ment frequency range. 

Proper broadband pyramidal absorbers mounted on 
nearly all the surfaces of a screened room can ensure 
that reflections and resonances are controlled from 
very low frequencies (i.e. 30 MHz) in such a screened 
and also anechoic room. 

Conducted emission tests that measure the currents 
generated by the robot on its cables (mains, signal or 
control cables) are normally performed in a screened 
or anechoic room. 

Screened rooms are used to protect the test site from 
the electromagnetic field outside, that is the fierd 
generated by sources located out of the test room 
and whose contribution, when it is not eliminated, 
makes the measurement incorrect and unrepeatable. 

For this reason, before each emission test, lEC CISPR 
Publications require that a preliminary "environmental 
noise" measurement be carried out that is lower than 
the CISPR limits. 

In addition, during radiated emission tests it is 
necessary to carefully determine the robot configur- 
ation and its operating state that are related to the 
robot maximum radiated and conducted electro- 
magnetic emission. 

Radiated immunity tests that measure the effect of 
fields on, the correct operation of the robot are 
performed in test sites where the required field 
uniformity shall be achieved at all measurement 
frequencies. 

For the safety of the test operators, who must be 
protected from the high frequency and high intensity 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



electromagnetic fields generated inside the test site, 
at least a screened roonn is necessary, even if open 
sites are acceptable in less populated sections of the 
country, providing legal linnits are met. 

In partially lined screened rooms, which are screened 
rooms modified with a quantity of radio frequency 
(RF) absorbing material employed to damp typical 
resonances in unlined rooms, performing radiated 
immunity tests is allowed, provided that a uniform 
field can be established. 

On the other hand, considering the size of a robot, to 
reach a better field uniformity during radiated 
immunity tests on robots the use of a screened 
anechoic room is recommended, even if partially lined 
screened rooms are less expansive than the anechoic 
rooms. 

Figure 1 shows the layout of a screened anechoic 
room suitable for performing EMC tests on robots. 
Besides an anechoic room, some contiguous 
screened rooms are usually used to leave the test 
instrumentation and the equipment interacting with 
the robot during the radiated immunity tests. 

In addition, the uniformity of the generated electro- 
magnetic field is improved using proper antennas (i.e. 
a multiwire transmission line) and adopting an appro- 
priate test setup. 



5.2 Robot operating conditions 

The robot shall be correctly installed (electric and 
mechanical installation) and fully operational (starting 
up and functional tests) in accordance with the 
manufacturer's recommendations. 

Before each EMC test, it is very important to define 
the configuration of the robot specifying the I/O 
states, its possible connection with some external 
equipment or any information useful in better 
identifying the robot. 

In this way, during EMC tests it is possible to evaluate 
the behaviour of a robot in its "basic configuration", 
i.e. the simplest and the most reproducible configur- 
ation. 



6 Test methods 

6.1 Robot characterization without 
electromagnetic disturbances 

Carry out path repeatability or pose repeatability tests 
in accordance with ISO 9283 to characterize the robot 
without EMC disturbances. 




Screened room 



/ 



Control 
screened room 



Amplifiers 
screened room 



Rgure 1 — Layout of a screened anechoic room 



IS 15033 ; 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



Tests shall be performed at nominal load and at 
maximum velocity. 

The results of these tests give the robot performance 
reference values when it is working according to the 
manufacturer's technical specifications. It is possible 
to evaluate the EMC test results by comparing these 
results with those obtained in the same configuration 
during EMC tests. 

6.2 Electromagnetic compatibility tests on 
robots: evaluation criteria 

During EMC tests, the robot is configured in several 
"operating states" to obtain the greatest quantity of 
information about the behaviour of the robot subjec- 
ted to electromagnetic influences. 

Tests shall be performed at least in the states given in 
table 1 . 

Table 1 



Operating 
state 


Definition 


1 


Control system switched on, with the robot 
arm power off 


2 


Robot arm power on and stopped in the 
automatic mode 


3 


Robot arm power on, operating under the 
path control and returning into a pro- 
grammed point in the teach programming 
mode 


4 


Robot arm power on, operating under the 
path control and returning into a pro- 
grammed point in the automatic mode 



Consequently, during the EMC tests on the robot 
operating in each of the above-mentioned states, the 
following robot performance shall be checked: 

a) robot motion check in accordance with the criteria 
established in 6.1; 

b) robot control check (serial tines, monitor and/or 
display, system I/O, user I/O). 

In the lEC Standards relating to immunity tests, some 
definitions are given about the malfunction evaluation 
criteria. 

Nevertheless, these criteria can be substituted by 
those established in the robot manufacturer's specifi- 
cation. 

Test evaluation criteria, in accordance with the I EC 
classification and applicable to robots, are given in 
table 2. 

During the execution of each EMC test, it is useful to 
report the possible malfunctions that have been found 



in two tables (from the least to the most serious, as 
listed in table 2) in each "operating state" of the robot 
(as defined in table 1). Examples of suitable tables are 
given as tables B.I and B.2. 

Table 2 



Malfunction 
criterion 


Definition 


a 


Normal performance within the specifi- 
cation limits (no fault) 


b 


Temporary acceptable loss of one or more 
functions (minor fault) 


c 


Temporary degradation or loss of function 
or performance that the robot under test is 
able to self-recover (greater fault) 


d 


Temporary degradation or loss of function 
or performance which requires operator 
intervention at least to switch off and start 
up the robot (critical fault) 


e 


Degradation or permanent loss of function 
or performance that the robot is unable to 
recover due to both hardware and software 
damages (damage) 



The final test result is determined by the most serious 
malfunction that happened in a state, considering both 
tables. 

Maintenance of robot performance during both the 
EMC test and the robot performance check after the 
EMC test constitutes a successful test. This pro- 
cedure is mandatory for the EMC test result 
evaluation. 

The main robot malfunctions that can occur are the 
following: 

— .incorrect displacements (velocities higher or lower 
than the imposed ones, including abnormal stop; 
execution of unprogrammed paths; positioning 
errors); 

— communication errors; 

— incorrect robot I/O state; 

— errors on programming terminal display (but if 
errors consist only of "flickering" and do not 
cause difficulties in practical use of the terminal 
they are considered acceptable). 

6.3 List of possible electromagnetic 
compatibility tests on robots 

Possible EMC tests for robots are as follows: 

a) Electrostatic discharge immunity tests 

Tests concerning contact and air electrostatic dis- 
turbances in accordance with lEC 801-2. 



IS 15033: 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



b) Radiated/conducted electromagnetic fields im- 
munity tests 

Tests concerning electromagnetic fields gener- 
ated in the frequency range 80 MHz to 1 GHz 
(80 % amplitude, 1 kHz sinusoidal modulation) in 
accordance with lEC 1000-4-3. For lower fre- 
quencies (up to 9 kHz), conducted immunity tests 
are preferred to radiated tests (see lEC 801-6). 

c) Electrical fast transient/bursts immunity tests 

Tests concerning short rise time (5 ns), spike 
duration 50 ns, low energy and high repetition rate 
transients, due to Interruption of Inductive loads or 
relay contacts bounce, conducted in accordance 
wjthlEC801-4. 

d) Surge immunity tests 

Tests concerning induced voltage surge 
(1,2 iJs/50 Ms) caused by switching phenomena or 
faults in the power network and lightning stroke, 
conducted in accordance with I EC 1000-4-5. 

e) Harmonics immunity tests 

Tests concerning network frequency harmonics 
conducted in accordance with lEC 1000-4-1 (see 
lEC 1000-2-1 and I EC 1000-2-2 for the definition 
and the compatibility levels). 

f) Ring wave immunity tests 

Tests concerning oscillatory transients 
(100 kHz/0,5 ps) conducted in accordance with 
lEC 1000-4-1. This test is complementary to the 
surge test. 

g) Damped oscillatory waves immunity tests 

Tests concerning 0.1 MHz and 1 MHz damped 
oscillatory transients (the rise time of both 
waves Is 75 ns) conducted in accordance with 
lEC 1000-4-1. The 100 kHz damped oscillatory 
wave test is complementary to the surge test, but 
it is similar to the ring wave test with only a 
shorter rise time. Therefore ring wave is an 
alternative to the 100 KHz damped oscillatory 
wave with less severe requirements. 

h) High frequency induced continuous waves 
voltages immunity tests 

Tests concerning high frequency induced voltages 
in the frequency range 0,01 MHz to 1 MHz 
conducted in accordance with lEC 1000-4-1. 

i) Voltage dips and short inten^uptions immunity 
tests 

Immunity tests concerning power supply voltage 
dips and short interruptions conducted in ac- 
cordance with I EC 1000-4-1 (see I EC 1000-2-1 and 
lEC 1000-2-2 for the definition and the com^ 
patibllity levels). 

j) Conducted emission measurements 



Measurements In the frequency range 0,15 MHz 
to 30 MHz in accordance with CISPR 1 1 and 
CISPR 22. 

k) Radiated emission measurements 

Measurements in the frequency range 30 MHz to 
1 GHz in accordance with CISPR 11 and 
CISPR 22. 

All the above-mentioned conducted Immunity tests 
are applicable to the robot control system power 
supply lines. In addition, fast transients immunity 
tests can be performed on the input/output control 
circuit and signal lines. 

Electrostatic discharge immunity tests are applicable 
only outside the robot working space. 

The whole robot, manipulator inclusive of the control 
system, has to be tested during electromagnetic 
fields immunity tests and radiated emission measure- 
ments. 

Among the above-mentioned tests, some of them can 
be considered essential to a preliminary EMC charac- 
terization of the robot. 

On the basis of testing experience, the following EMC 
tests shall be considered as mandatory for a robot: 

— electrostatic discharges immunity tests; 

— electrical fast transientsA)ursts immunity tests; 

— voltage dips and short interruptions immunity 
tests; 

— surge immunity tests. 

If these tests are successfully passed. It means that 
the correct performance maintenance of the robot 
subjected to some of the most common and 
dangerous electromagnetic disturbances has been 
proved and the occurrence of possible malfunctions 
during its normal working is drastically decreased. 

Further EMC test requirements shall be In agreement 
with the manufacturer, who shall take into account 
both the typology of the typical robot application and 
the electromagnetic environment where the robot 
under test Is foreseen to work. 

More details are given about the above-mentioned 
EMC tests In annex A. 

6.4 Suggested levels of electromagnetic 
compatibility tests on robots 

EMC test levels (severity levels) shall be selected on 
the basis of the electromagnetic environment where 
the robot under test is destined to operate. 

The definition of electromagnetic environment (see 
3.2) Is discussed in I EC 1000-1-1. It is pointed out that 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062: 1994 



"the totality of electromagnetic phenomena existing 
at a given location" means that "an" environment is 
considered instead of "every" environment. 

As a consequence, if a device has the property of 
being electromagnetically compatible in a particular 
environment it does not mean that it will be electro- 
magnetically compatible in another environment. 

In most cases the properties of the electromagnetic 
environment are never 100% predictable because 
they are location-dependent and time-dependent. 

This is a very critical point because it requires at least 
to identify which kind of electromagnetic fields and 
disturbances are generated by equipment or devices 
inside the environment under consideration. Only 
after this check is it possible to identify in which 
electromagnetic environment the robot is really 
working. 

Therefore, collecting data and information about the 
environment is necessary, but if data are insufficient, 
an experimental investigation, normally rather expen- 
sive, is performed. 

In addition, the definition of EMC {see 3.5) refers to 
"the ability of an equipment or system to function 
satisfactorily in its electromagnetic environment 
without introducing intolerable disturbances to 
anything in that environment"- 

This means that not only equipment, devices or 
systems are involved, but also living creatures: this is 
an important aspect when emission limits are set to 
electromagnetic fields, to achieve EMC. 

On the other hand, well known and defined 
environmental characteristics can become a guide for 
designing robots that are immune from EMC 
disturbances regarding the actual environment and, at 
the same time, are unable to Introduce disturbances 
in their operating environment. 

In addition to the environmental conditions, the proper 
choice of EMC test levels depends on numerous 
factors, mainly: 

— kinds of disturbances affecting the equipment: 

— required reliability and behaviour; 

— economical constraints. 

These factors are connected together because, for 
example, very high reliability requirements are 
normally contrary to economical constraints. 

Recently, some electromagnetic environments 
models have been defined by lEC 1000 in order to 
apply the same EMC requirements to all the 
equipment working in similar places and to provide 



the data necessary to identify the environment from 
an electromagnetic point of view. 

The typical working environment of a manipulating 
industrial robot is light or heavy industry, where power 
is distributed by an industrial low-voltage distribution 
network with a dedicated distribution transformer 
usually located near or inside the plant. Low-voltage 
a.c. distribution systems are characterized by a 
nominal voltage up to 240 V single-phase, or up to 
415 V three-phase, and a nominal frequency of 50 Hz 
or 60 Hz, In heavy industrial environments low voltage 
a.c. distribution systems can reach 1 kV. 

According to I EC 1000. the major contributors to the 
industrial environment are the presence of one or 
more of the following conditions: 

— industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) apparatus, 
e.g. welding machines, are present; 

— heavy inductive or capacitlve loads are frequently 
switched; 

— currents and associated magnetic fields are high. 

In addition to the industrial environment, a robot could 
even work In hostile electromagnetic environments 
such as high voltage substations. 

In this situation it Is necessary to know or to measure 
the level of the electromagnetic disturbances genera- 
ted by the hostile environment because there are no 
suitable reference models which can describe the 
so-called "special" environments. 

As the EMC test level is related to the environmental 
class level, I EC 1000-4-1 indicates that: 

— the values of the EMC disturbances to apply to 
the robot under test shall be selected among 
those that are typical of the industrial environ- 
ment, that are related to test level 3; 

— test level 4 shall be applied only in particular 
critical situations; 

— the special level X shall be applied only if robots 
are destined to very hostile environments. 

The test level value can be reduced if it is declared 
that the environment where the robot will work is less 
critical than the industrial environment model. 

6.5 Recommended tests related to some 
robotic applications 

Table 3 gives a correlation between the main robot 
applications and the applicable EMC tests selection 
criteria. 

Moreover, it gives some Indications on the chosen 
values of each EMC test according to the suitable 
electromagnetic environmental model. 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062: 1994 



Tables 





Spot welding 


Handling, 

loading, 

unloading 


Robot applications 

Machining. 
Assembly, deburring. Spray 
inspection polishing, painting 
cutting 


Arc welding 


Adhesive 
sealant 


Subclause in 
150 9283:1990 


7.2.2 


7.2.2 


7.2.2 and 8.3 


8.3 


8.3 


8.3 


8.3 


EMC test level values recommended | 


Electrostatic 
discharges. kV^*: 

— contact discharge 

— air discharge 


6 
8 


6 
8 


6 
8 


6 
8 


— 


6 
8 


6 
8 


Electromagnetic radiated 
fields, V/m 


10 


_2) 


7) 


10 


10 


10 


10 


Fast transient, kV: 

— power supply 

— continuous and 
signal 


2 

1 


2 
1 


2 

1 


2 

1 


2 
1 


2 

1 


2 

1 


Induced voltage 
5urge, kV^J 


2 to 4 


2 to 4 


2 to 4 


2 to 4 


2 to 4 


2 to 4 


2 to 4 


Harmonics THD, % 


10 


10 


10 


10 


10 


10 


10 


Ring wave, kV 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


Damped oscillatory 
wave, kV 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


2 


HF induced continuous 
waves voltage.V 


50 


50 


50 


50 


50 


50 


50 


Voltage, ms^h 

— dips (-20 %) 

— short interruptions 
(-100%) 


50 
20 


50 
20 


50 
20 


50 
20 


50 
20 


50 
20 


50 
20 


1) Test values reported are equal to test level 3; remember to check the relative humidity value and the presence or the 
absence of synthetic materials to increase, if necessary, the test level. 

2) When in the environment a moderate electromagnetic radiation is present, that is when low power (less than 1 W rating) 
portable transceivers are used but with restrictions on their use in close proximity to the robot, it is advisable to perform the 
test at a field level value of 3 V/m (that means at the test level 2). 

3) The recommended test levels are located between level 3 and level 4 established in lEC 1000-4-1 . 

The test level selection depends greatly on the type of connection between the robot and the outdoor environment. For 
example, interconnecting cables running as outdoor cables can be subjected to interference voltages generated by lightning 
if the outdoor environment is insufficiently protected. 

It is suggested to apply test level 4 (4 kV) if the installed robot is insufficiently protected from lightning. 

4) The reported test levels are applicable to electrical and electronic parts of the robot whose rated current is up to 1 6 A per 
phase. Higher currents robots shall be tested, reducing the duration of the power voltage short interruption (for example 
10 ms). 



Main robot applications included in table 3 come from 
ISO 9283: 1990/Amd.1, which contains the require- 
ments for robot performance assessment and gives 
criteria to select essential robot performance tests for 
some typical robot applications. 

It specifies two robot applications classes, i.e. 

— if the application normally requires a pose-to-pose 
control, it is necessary to perform at least pose 
repeatability tests (see 180 9283:1990, subclause 
7.2.2); 



— if the application normally requires a continuous 
path control, it is necessary to perform at least 
path repeatability tests (see ISO 9283:1990, 
subclause 8.3). 

The advantage of this method is that it reduces the 
quantity of tests that are necessary to characterize 
the robot performance for specific applications. In 
addition, this method allows to select which robot 
performafice verification is better to apply to evaluate 
the EMC tests. 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



The recommended EMC test levels in table 3, which 
are almost all equal to the test level 3, are given as 
voltage peak values unless otherwise stated. 

Table 3 is a guide for selection of EMC tests in 
relation to the main robot applications, with some 
indications about test levels. 

Table 4 refers to both conducted and radiated 
emission tests appicable to robots. Test levels shall 
be selected taking into consideration whether devices 
or living creatures near the robot are protected or not 
from electromagnetic disturbances generated by the 



robot. Emission levels are chosen in accordance with 
lEC/CISPR 11 indications. The main robot applications 
in table 4 are classified into four relevant areas: RF 
excited arc welding; non RF excited arc welding; spot 
welding; others. 

It is important to note that some values given in 
table 4 are still under consideration; e.g. there are two 
types of arc welding applications, TIG and MIG. which 
should be further analysed. 

Further experimental verifications will be done to 
update tables 3 and 4. 



Table 4 





RF excited arc welding 


Non-RF excited 
arc welding 


Robot applical 

Spot welding 


Cions 

Others^* 


Spray painting 


Adhesive sealant 


Subclause in 
ISO 9283:1990 


8.3 


8.3 


7.2.2 


7.2.2 and 8.3 


8.3 


8.3 


EMC test level values recommended 


Conducted 
emissions 


tSM Group 2 class A 
too restrictive. 

Limits are under 
consideration. 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


ISM Group 1 
class A 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


Radiated 
emissions 


ISM Group 2 class A 
too restrictive. 

Limits are under 
consideration. 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


tSM Group 2 
class A 


ISM Group 1 
class A 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


ISM Group 2 
class A 


1) "Others" means Handling, Loading, Unloading, Assembly, Inspection, Machining, Deburring, Polishing, Cutting robots. 
These robots are classified in the ISM group 1 class A unless some specific applications are proved to be included in the 
tSM group 2 class A as reported in !EC CISPR Publication 11, annex A detailed list. 



8 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



Annex A 

(normative) 

Suggestion for EMC tests execution on robots 



In this annex, the EMC tests reported in 6.3 are 
discussed. In addition, mandatory tests like electro- 
static discharges, fast transients voltage dips and 
short interruptions and surge are thoroughly con- 
sidered. 



A.1 Immunity tests concerning 
electrostatic discharges 

Electrostatic discharges (ESD) can influence the 
operation of the robot or damage its electronic circuit 
either by a direct effect or indirectly by inductive 
coupling or radiation. 

ESD shall be applied only to such points and surfaces 
of the robot which are normally accessible to the test 
operator and which are outside the robot working 
space. 

In addition, tests shall be also carried out on 
connectors, serial and t/0 ports located on the control 



system, provided that they are accessible outside the 
control system. 

Direct application of discharges consists of single 
discharges applied between the selected test points 
and earth. 

To perform the test at least 10 discharges (positive 
and negative) with intervals of at least 1 s between 
successive discharges are applied. 

The points to which discharges are to be applied may 
be selected by an exploration with 20 discharges per 
second. 

To simulate discharges between objects in the 
proximity of the robot, the discharge is applied to the 
ground plane or to a metal plate 50 cm x 50 cm 
around the robot (located 10 cm from it). 

Figures A.I and A.2 show the typical ESD waveform 
and generator diagram. 




Rgure A.1 — Typical waveform of the output current of the ESD generator 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062: 1994 



/?, = 50 MO to 100 MO 



e 



^^ 




Discharge tip 



rs = 150pF 



Discharge return connection 

V is the high-voltage source (16,5 kV) 

7?c is the charging resistor (50 MQ to 1 00 MU) 

Cg is the energy storage capacitor (1 50 pF) 

R^ is the discharge resistor (330 Q) 

Figure A.2 — Simplified diagram of the ESD generator 



A.2 Immunity tests concerning 
electromagnetic fields 

Radio transmitters or any other device ennitting 
continuous wave-radiated electronnagnetic energy 
generate electromagnetic fields. 

Even if the immunity of robots to the radiation of 
hand-held transceivers (walkie-talkies) is one of the 
main concerns, other sources of electromagnetic 
fields, such as fixed-station, radio and transmitters, 
vehicle radio transmitters and various industrial 
electromagnetic sources or intermittent sources are 
to be considered. 

In order to obtain reproducible results, tests shall be 
carried out in a suitable test site (see 5.1). 

The choice of the robot performance measurement 
system is a critical point; the susceptibility of the 
measuring system shall also be verified. 



A.3 Immunity tests concerning conducted 
disturbances 

Surge withstand tests, in addition to dielectric 
strength and insulation resistance tests, shall be 
carried out for safety purposes and performed before 
any other immunity test on the unenergized robot. 

Low- and high-frequency conducted immunity tests 
are recommended to be performed using both a pulse 
generator and a robot performance measurement 
system equipped with a trigger to monitor the 
synchronism of the events. 



Fast transients, voltage dips and short interruptions, 
and surge immunity tests, from the list of conducted 
immunity tests listed in 6.3, are discussed in detail in 
this clause because they are considered mandatory. 



A.3.1 Fast transients 

The significant characteristics of these transients are 
the fast rise time (5 ns), short duration {50 % pulse 
duration is 50 ns) and low energy but high repetition 
rate (5 kHz or 2,5 kHz). 

The test is performed with repetitive bursts of short 
pulses as shown in figures A.3 and A.4. 




NOTE — 1 =100% 

Figure A.3 -— Waveform of a single spike 
into 50 O. load 



10 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



A schematic representation of the test generator is 
shown in figure A.5. 

The test voltage shall be applied to: 

— power supply lines {in connnnon mode between 
each of the power supply terminals and the 



nearest protective earth point or reference ground 
plane); 

— control and signal lines and communications lines 
(in common mode preferably with the capacitive 
coupling damp). 

The minimum duration of the test is 1 min. 




Spike 



■ Depends on the test voltage Level 



15 ms 



Burst length 



Burst-repetition 
rote 5,0/2,5 kHz 



Burst period 300 ms 



Figure A.4 — General graph of a fast transient 




V is the high-voltage source 
/?c is ttie charging resistor 



Q is the energy storage capacitor 

Figure A.5 — Fast transient generator 



/?s is the pulse duration shaping resistor 
/?m is the impedance nnatching resistor 
Cd is the d.c. blocking capacitor 



11 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



A.3.2 Voltage dips and short interruptions 

The purpose of the test is to verify the immunity of 
the robot to voltage dips and short interruptions 
caused by faults in low-voltage, medium-voltage and 
high-voltage networks (short circuits or ground faults) 
or by faults switching rapid reclosure. 

The robot is initially in operation at its rated voltage 
and then is subjected to voltage dips or interruption in 
accordance with figure A.6. 

In order to simulate the conditions in certain 
networks, a test with a cycle of two consecutive 
dips/interruptions with variable time interval may also 
be considered. 

A robot is normally a three-phase device; in this 
situation voltage dips shall be applied either on all the 
three phases simultaneously or on one or two phases 
only. 



A.3.3 Surge 

The induced voltage surge, which is caused by 
switching phenomena or faults in power networks or 
by lightning strokes, can produce different effects 
depending on the relative impedance of the source 
and of the robot {robot impedance higher than the 
source ones means induced voltage pulse; the 
opposite situation means an induced current). 

Therefore, the test surges should have the following 
basic characteristics: 

— a voltage pulse 1,2/50tJS for open circuit gener- 
ators (see Figure A.7); 

— a current pulse 8/20ps for short-circuited gen- 
erators. 

The test generator shall be capable of delivering, in 
open circuit, a voltage pulse, as well as, in short 
circuit, a current pulse of the specified forms and 
magnitudes. 



it; = 30 % to 100 % 



t,.tt, 



t.^Lty 



Rgure A.6 — Example of a test cycle with two voltage dips 




Front time: 

Ti = 1,67x7:= 1,2 MS ±30 % 

Time to half value; 

72 = 50 MS ± 20 % 

T = 0,72 MS ± 30 % 

/d = 50 MS ± 20 % 

fr = 1 MS ± 20 % 



NOTE — 1 = 100% 



Figure A.7 — Open-circuit voltage waveform 



12 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



Figure A.8 is a schematic representation of such a 
"hybrid" circuit. 

The test shall be carried out at least five times with 
each polarity, if possible each time at a different 
position of the mains voltage wave. The time 
between two surges depends on the recovery time 
(built-in) protection (for example repetition rate: one 
per minute). 



A.4 Conducted and radiated emission 
measurements 

To perform these tests on robots, it shall be 
necessary to determine the robot operating states 
corresponding to the maximum conducted or radiated 
emissions. 




V is the high-voltage source 

Re is the charging resistor 

Q is the energy storage capacitor 

/?s is the pulse duration shaping resistor 

Rm is the impedance matching resistor 

Lr is the impedance matching inductor 



Figure A.8 — Combination wave generator 



13 



IS 15033 : 2001 
ISO/TR 11062 : 1994 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Suggestions for the layout of the test report 



Tables B.l and B.2 are suggested layouts for the 
presentation of EMC test results. 

The coding for the operating states is as follows: 

1 control systenn switched on, with the robot arnn 
power off 

2 robot arm power on and stopped in the 
autonnatic nnode 

3 robot arnn power on, operating under the path 
control and returning into a progrannnned point 
in the teach progrannnning nnode 

4 robot arm power on, operating under the path 
control and returning into a programmed point 
in the automatic mode 

The coding for the malfunction criteria is as follows: 
a no fault 
b minor fault 
c greater fault 
d critical fault 
e damage 



Table B.l — Robot motion check in accordance with 
the criteria established in 6.1 



Robot motion evaluation 
EMC test: 




Operating 
states 


Malfunction criteria 


a 


b 


c 


d 


e 


1 


Not applicable 


2 












3 












4 













Table B.2 — Robot control check (serial lines, 

monitor and/or display, system I/O, user I/O) in 

accordance wKh the manirfacturer's specification 



Robot control evaluation 
EMC test: 




Operating 
states 


Malfunction criteria 


a 


b 


c 


d 


e 


1 












2 












3 












4 













u 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indi- 
cates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for 
revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amend- 
ments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. BP 18 (0056). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31 , 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 
Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

1/14 C.I.T Scheme VII M, V. I. R Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160 022 



Southern : C.I.T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

r 323 76 17 
\ 323 38 41 

r337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 91 20 

J 60 38 43 
\ 60 20 25 

J254 1216, 2541442 
\254 2519, 2541315 

r 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOTTHIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Prabhal Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



