**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13392 (1992) : Programme Flow for Processing Sequential 
Files in Terms of Record Groups for Information Processing 
[LITD 14: Software and System Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13392:1992 
ISO 6593 : 1985 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



//7c//aA7 Standard 

PROGRAMME FLOW FOR PROCESSING 
SEQUENTIAL FILES IN TERMS OF RECORD 
GROUPS FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING 



UDC 68r3066 



OBIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 , 

April 1992 Price Group 4 



IS 13392:1992 
ISO 6593: 1985 

Indian Standard 

PROGRAMME FLOW FOR PROCESSING 
SEQUENTIAL FILES IN TERMS OF RECORD 
GROUPS FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING 

NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 6593 : 1985 Mnformation processing — 
Program flow for processing sequential files in terms of record groups' issued by the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on the recommendation of Information Systems and Software Sectional Committee 
( LTD 33 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



18 13392:1992 
ISO 6593 : 1985 



1 Scope and field of application 

1.1 This International Standard describes two alternative 
general procedures (method A and method B) for any program 
which is required to process sequential files which have been 
logically organized in terms of groups of records. 

Method A — Checks the control head condition after the 
termination of the appropriate level 

Method B — Checks the control head condition before the 
initiation of the appropriate level. 

Both are based upon the recognition that for each record which 
is to be processed a change, or lack of change, in the value of 
an item in that record may affect the flow of control. 



4) the actions to be taken when a control break at any 
level does, or does not exist; 

5) normal processing, if any; 

6) complete procedure termination. 



2 Definitions 

For the purpose of this International Standard the following 
definitions apply. 

2.1 complete procedure : All those activities described 
within this International Standard which commence with entry 
to the procedure and conclude with exit from the procedure. 



1.2 The procedures described may be used as the basis for 
designing any program in which 

a) one or more input files are to be processed sequentially; 

b) each input file is accessed in a defined order of logical 
groups of records; 

c) the records held in each input file contain specified 
items of data which may be used to determine whether or 
not a change of control is required in the processing se- 
quence. 



2.2 main procedure : All those activities, subsequent to the 
general initiation routine and prior to the general termination 
routine within the complete procedure. 

2.3 logical record : The set of data which is processed in a 
single iteration of the main procedure. 

NOTE — It may be part or the whole of a single physical record or of a 
nunnber of records. 

2.4 first input routine : Those activities required to obtain 
the logical record, if any, to be processed first. 



1.3 The procedures described in this International Standard 
are subject to the following constraints : 

a) The items of data which may determine control 
changes are organized into a logical sequence of levels such 
that a change of control at one level impJies changes of con- 
trol at subordinate levels. 

b) Only input files processed sequentially are described in 
this International Standard. 



2.5 input routine : Those activities required to obtain- the 
logical record to be processed next. 

NOTE — If there are no more logical records to be processed, the end- 
of-input condition becomes true. 

2.6 control field : The field comprising one or more input 
variables whose change in value, or lack of change,, between 
successive logical records affect the flow of control through the 
main procedure. 



c) The procedures described do not detail the routines 
that depend on user problem or installation, especially: 

1) complete procedure initiation; 

2) the sequence in which input files are to be accessed, 
if more than one; 

3) the means of assembling a logical record for pro- 
cessing; 



2.7 level : Where a logical record contains more than one 
control field element they are assumed to have a hierarchical 
relationship with one another, indicating a logical grouping. 
The position in the hierarchy ife termed a level and is indicated 
by means of a level number. 

NOTE — For the purpose of this International Standard only the level 
number is assigned such that the most subordinate control field ele- 
ment is assigned level 1, the next is level 2 etc. Where there are n levels 
the most superior control field element will be at level n. 



rS 13392: 1992 
ISO 6593 : 1985 



2.8 level 1 control break : A situation which occurs when 
the values in the control field elements in the current logical 
record {and at the level specified) are not the sanne as the values 
in the sanne elennents of the immediately previously processed 
logical record. 

NOTE — The values of the control field elements will be obtained from 
the current logical record in the intiation routines of the appropriate 
level. The action of examining the control field should ensure that if 
there is a change in value at a level above 1, a control break is 
registered at all levels subordinate to the level at which the change ac- 
tually occurs. 

2.9 level 1 record group : Level 1 record group is a set of 
records whose control field elements are equal for at! levels 
superior to and including level 1. 

2.10 level 1 termination routine : Those activities required 
when level 1 control break occurs to conclude processing all 
records belonging to level 1 record group. 

2.11 level 1 initiation routine ; Those activities required 
when level 1 control break occurs to commence processing all 
records belonging to level 1 record group. 

2.12 unchanged level : Those activities required when the 
level 1 - 1 control break did occur but the level 1 control break 
did not. 



3 Description of method A 

This description should be read in conjunction with figure 1, 
where ''n" is ''3". 

Upon entry to the complete procedure the program undertakes 
any necessary initiation activities (for example: obtain and 
open input files, if not previously assigned). The program then 
enters the first input routine and checks whether there is in fact 
some input data to be processed. If none, the program per- 
forms the empty files processing routine and exits from the 
complete procedure via the complete procedure termination 
routine. 

Where there is input data to be processed the program per- 
forms the general initiation routine and then enters the level in- 
itiation routines in turn, commencing at the most superior level 
and finishing with the level 1 initiation. The program then 
enters the normal processing routine for the first logical record. 

On subsequent iterations the program, for each logical record, 
tests for control Ipreaks, commencing at level 1, As defined in 
2.8, a control break is also registered at all levels subordinate to 
that at which there Is an actual change in vahe. Thus if there is 
no control break at level 1 there is no change in value for any 
control field element; the program enters the unchanged level 1 
routine (when used) and continues to the normal processing 
routine for the current logical record. If a control break does oc- 
cur at level 1 the program enters the level 1 termination routine 
and then tests for a control break at (eve! 2; if there is no con- 
trol break at level 2, the flow of control passes in turn through 



the unchanged level 2 (when used), level 1 initiation and nor- 
mal processing routines. Otherwise, the level 2 termination 
routine is entered and a test made for a control break at level 3, 
etc. 

If there is a control break at the most superior, or nth level, 
then control breaks are registered at ail subordinate levels and 
level termination action taken for each of those levels up to, 
and including, the ^th level. The program then tests for end-of- 
input and, if that condition is true, performs the general ter- 
mination routine and leaves the complete procedure via the 
complete procedure termination routine; otherwise the level in- 
itiation routines are entered in turn from that for the A7th level to 
that for level 1, before entering the normal processing routine. 



4 Description of method B 

This description should be read in conjunction with figure 2. 

Upon entry to the complete procedure the program undertakes 
any necessary initiation activities (for example : obtain and 
open input files, if not previously assigned). The program then 
enters the first input routine and checks whether there is in fact 
some input data to be processed, if none, the program exits 
from the complete procedure via the complete procedure ter- 
mination routine. 

Where there is input data to be processed the program enters 
the level initiation routines in turn, commencing at the most 
superior level and finishing with level 1 initiation. The program 
then enters the normal processing routine for the first logical 
record. 

On subsequent iterations the program, for each logical record, 
tests for control breaks, commencing at level 1. As defined in 
2.8, a contro\ break is also registered at all levels subordinate to 
that at which there is an actual change in value. Thus if there is 
no control break at level 1 there is no change in value for any 
control field element; the program continues to the normal pro- 
cessing routine for the current logical record. If a control break 
does occur at level 1 the program enters the level 1 termination 
routine and then tests for a control break at level 2; if there is no 
control break at level 2, the flow of control passes in turn 
through the level 1 initiation and normal processing routines. 
Otherwise, the level 2 termination routine is entered and a test 
made for a control break at level 3, etc.* 

If there is a control break at the most superior, or ^th level, then 
control breaks are registered at all subordinate levels and level 
termination action taken for each of those levels up to, and in- 
cluding, the n^^ level. The program then tests for end-of-input 
and, if that condition is true, leaves the complete procedure via 
the complete procedure termination routine; otherwise the 
level initiation routines are entered in turn from that for the 
n^^ level to that for level 1, before entering the normal process- 
ing routine. 

If there is any need for unchanged ^leve! routines the ap- 
propriate activities should be incorporated m the initiation 
and/or termination routines. 



IS 13392: 1992 
ISO 6593: 1985 



Entry 




Complete 
procedure 

initiation 
routine 



Empty files 

processing 




Level n 
initiation 

routine 



Level 2 

initiation 
routine 



Level 1 
initiation 
routine 



See 

footnote 1) 



Normal 
processing 



Input 

routine 




Level 1 

termination 
routine 



Level 2 

temni nation 

routine 




Level rj 

termination 

routine 



General 
termiriation 

routine 



Comptete 

procedure 

termination 

routine 



-CE3 



Figure 1 — Method A flowchart 



1) Jf ^n unchanged level routine is required, insert here. 



IS 13392: 1992 
ISO 6593 : 1985 



( Entiv j 



CoTiplete 
procedure 




Comptete 
procedure 




Level n 
initiatton 
routine 




Level n 

termination 

routine 



Level 2 

termination 

routine 




Level 1 

termination 

routine 



Normal 
processing 



4 



Input 



Figure 2 — Method B flowchart 



IS 13392 
ISO 6593 



1992 
: 1985 



Annex A 
Implementation recommendations 

(This annex forms part of the standard.) 



A.1 Organization of control field 

The elennent(s) in a control field may, or may not, be con- 
tiguous. There are advantages in arranging for such contiguity 
but the layout of the logical record may be subject to other con- 
siderations. If practicable the arrangement outlined in figure 3 
should be obtained; otherwise the logic of the input routine 
should place the control field elements in some area of working 
storage for access in control break testing. 

Control fields are arranged with the most superior control field 
element (level n) being the most significant followed by, in 
order of significance, other control field elements with the most 
subordinate control field element (level 1) being the least 
significant. 

When testing for a control break at level 1, the control field 
elements, from level 1 to level n in ascending order of 
significance, for the current logical record are compared with 
those of the previously processed logical record. 

Table 1 demonstrates the levels at which control breaks would 
be registered for a number of successive logical records, 
assuming foup levels of control. 



A. 2 General termination 

When all input has been processed, level termination activities 
shall be carried out for all levels-. The end-of-input condition 
normally becomes apparent within the Input routine and it is 
recommended that, in such a situation, the input routine sets 
the control field to higher values, unless such values are ob- 
tained through a high values record appearing on the input. In 
many applications it is customary to finalize by-product infor- 
mation when the end of actual input is reached, for example 
pass check sums to an output file or print totals on an analysis. 



A. 3 Level termination routines 

It should be noted that although a control break may be 
registered as a consequence of examining the control field 
elements in the current logical record, the information content 
of that record does not contribute towards that which may be 
processed in level termination routines. 



CONTROL FIELD 
ELEMENT LEVELS 




CONTROL FIELD 
ELEMENT LEVEL 2 


CONTROL FIELD 
ELEMENT LEVEL 1 


level n 


level 2 






^ level 1 


^- 



Figure 3 — Parts of control field used In control fipid testing 



Table 1 — Examples of control field breaks 



Value of control 


Control breaks 
registered at 


Contents of control field elements 


level 4 


level 3 


level 2 


level 1 


RIO 
RIO 
RIO 
TYO 
TYO 


78 
78 
78 
78 
79 


11 
12 
12 
12 
01 


30 
15 
16 
16 
02 


(first pass) 
level 1 and 2 
level 1 

level 1, 2, 3, 4 
level 1, 2, 3 



IS 13392: 1992 
ISO 6593:1985 



Annex b 



Example of application : Budget analysis 

{This annex does not fornn part of the Standard.) 



A maintained file contains details of expenditure, organized in groups of budget centres within departments in operating divisions. 
There may be more than one record for the same budget centre. An analysis is to be produced which shows a summary of costs for 
each grouping level. 

For the benefit of this example the logic concerned with such errors as input file out of sequence or invalid control field is not dis- 
cussed here. 

The complete procedure initiation routine opens the input file and a print stream. 



value of 

level 3 = operating division; 
level 2 - department; 
level 1 = budget centre. 

The general initiation routine clears final totals. When a!! input has been processed, the genera! termination routine prints final totals" 
upon a separate page. 

Control breaks are registered by comparing the control field of the current input record with that of the previously processed record. 
Action is than as summarized in table 2. Note that there are no unchanged level routines used in this example. 

Table 2 — Control break actions in budget analysis 



Control break 

level (and 
significance! 


Level termination routine 


Level Initiation routine 


1 : Budget centre 


Print centre totals. Add budget centre totals to 
department totals. 


Clear budget centre totals. Set up control field 
elements at all levels from old record. 


2 : Department 


Print department totals. Add department totals to 
operating division. 


Clear department totals. Start new page if less than 
10 lines remain on page. 


3; Operating division 


Print operating division totals. Add operating divi- 
sion totals to final totals. 


Clear operating division. Start new page. 



The normal processing routine will add the detailed costs to the budget centre totals. 

The complete procedure termination routine prints error messages, if any, and closes the input file and the print stream. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Bureau of Indian Standard 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in v/ritting of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designation. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc : No. LTD 33 ( 1540 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text AflFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 



31 

75 



C331 01 
^331 13 

C37 84 99, 37 85 61, 
^37 86 26, 37 85 62 

^53 38 43, 53 16 40, 
^33 23 84 

C4124 42, 4125 19, 
^41 23 15, 41 29 16 



[ 



632 92 95, 63 27 80, 
632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, 
LUCKNOW, PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



