**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12275 (1987) : Standard for time-to-amplitude convertors 
for multichannel amplitude analyzers [LITD 8: Electronic 
Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



*'VlWr^^ q r - - »» 

18:12275 - 1987 

UDC 539*1 075 : 621-374-3 lEC Pub 741 ( 1982 ) 

Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

STANDARD FOR TIME-TO-AMPLITUDE CONVERTS 
FOR MULTICHANNEL AMPLITUDE ANALYZERS 

f lEC Title : Multichannel Amplitude Analyzers : Standards for 
Time-to-Atnplitude Converters ) 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with lEG Pub 741 ( 1982 ) 'Multichannel amplitude 
analyzers: Standards for time-to-amplitude converters' is5ued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission ( lEG ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards and on the recommendation 
of the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee arid approval of the Electronics and Telecom- 
munication Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

Gross References 

In this Indian Standard^ the following Internationa] Standards are x^eferred to. Read in their 
respective places the corresponding Indian Standards: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

lEC Pub 578 ( 1977 ) Multichannel amplitude IS : 1 1885-1987 Specification for multi- 

analyzers: Types, main characteristics and channel amplitude analyzers 

technical requirements ( Identical ) 

lEG Pub 659 ( 1979, ) Test methods for muUi- IS ; 1 1886-1987 Test methods for multi- 

channel amplitude analyzers channel amplitude analyzers 

( Identical ) 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting 
it in this Indian Standard. 



Adopted 28 January 1987 



© November 1988, BIS 



Gt 5 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 



1. Scope 



This standard applies to time-to-amplitude converters (TAC) used in conjunction with multi- 
channel amplitude analyzers (MCA) in the measurement of time intervals. A common application 
of this technique is in time-of-flight measurements, coincidence measurements, pulse shape dis- 
crimination technique, etc. 



2. Object 



The object of this standard is to present terms and definitions relating to the main characteristics 
of TACs. Test methods for the major parameters are also stated. 



3. General 

3.1 The TACs considered in this standard are to be used in conjunction with MCAs having linear 

conversion characteristics as specified in I EC Publication 578: Muhichannel Amplitude Ana- 
lyzers. Types, Main Characteristics and Technical Requirements, The characteristics measured are 
those of the complete system (MCA plus TAC). 

The characteristics of the TAC given in this standard can only be found if the characteristics of 
the MCA are significantly better than those of the TAC. 

3.2 I EC Publication 659: Test Methods for Multichannel Amplitude Analyzers, specifies test proce- 

dures to be used for MCAs; reference to it should be made where appropriate. 

3.3 The general procedures of Clause 3 of I EC Publication 659 relating to the testing of MCAs are to be 

applied to the test procedures described herein for TACs, except that the MCA used for TAC tests 
shall be maintained at reference conditions whilst the conditions under which the TAC operates are 
varied. 

3.4 This standard is not intended to imply that all the tests described herein are mandatory; but only 

that such tests as are carried out shall be performed in accordance with the procedures given 
herein. 

4. Definitions 

4.1 Pulses 

An input signal with two determined levels for which the transition time from one level to the 
other is negligible in comparison to the present time on any level. The transition time is much less 
than the resolving time of TAC. The difference between the levels is the amplitude of the input 
pulse. For each of the following pulses the amplitude, polarity, timing and shape parameters shall be 
specified. 

3 (lEC page 7) 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 

4.1.1 Start pulse 

A pulse whose leading edge is used to initiate a time measurement conversion sequence. 

4.1.2 Stop pulse 

t A pulse whose leading edge is used to end a time measurement conversion sequence. 

4.1.3 Gate pulse 

A pulse which provides a means of gating the TAC with information other than that required for 
the time conversion. 

4. 1 .4 TAC output pulse 

A pulse whose amplitude is proportional to the time difference between the start and stop 
pulses. 

4.1.5 Maximum TAC output pulse amplitude 

The maximum TAC output pulse amplitude obtained when the time difference between start and 
stop pulses equals the TAC time range set. 

4.2 TAC time range 

The maximum time interval acceptable between start and stop pulses. A series of time ranges is 
usually specified. 

4.3 Conversion factor 

The ratio of TAC output pulse amplitude to TAC time interval corresponding to the ideal linear 
time response. It is expressed in units of volts per unit of time. 



4;4 Time response 

The relationship between the start and stop pulse time difference and the TAC output pulse 
amplitude. 

4.5 Ideal linear time response 

The straight line which represents the time response over the effective range. 

4.6 TAC integral non-linearity 

The maximum deviation of the time response on any TAC time range from the ideal linear time 
response, divided by the TAC time range. It is expressed as a percentage over a defined effective 

range. 

4.7 TAC differential non-linearity 

The maximum relative deviation of time response over a small time interval from the average 
value of the time response over all equal sized time intervals in any TAC lime range. 



(IECpage9) 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 



4.8 Time resolution 



The full width at half maximum height of the time response peak generated from a precision time 
calibrator. The resolution is specified for each TAC time range, units are quoted in time units or as a 
percentage. 

4.9 Effective range 

Limits on eacji TAC time range where the performance is within the stated specification. 

4.10 Additional error of conversion factor with temperature change 

The change of conversion factor with temperature expressed as time units per Celsius degree or 
as a percentage per Celsius degree for each TAC time range. 

4. 1 1 TAC reset time 

The time interval after an output pulse or an over-range event required to restore the TAC to a 
condition in which a subsequent time conversion sequence may commence. 

4.12 Minimum conversion time 

The shortest time needed to process valid data completely, 

4. 1 3 Count rate capability 

The input count rate at which the TAC output pulse amplitude, corresponding to a given time 
interval, deviates by a stated percentage from the value of the amphtude at a stated count rate. 



4. 14 TAC busy time 

The time interval between start pulse and the end of the reset time. 

5. Test methods 

5.1 Integral non-linearity 

5.1.1 Apparatus 

a) a pulse generator having two coincident outputs whose pulse characteristics match the require- 
ments of the start and stop pulses of the TAC under test; 

b) a precision variable delay unit; 

c) an MCA capable of accepting the TAC output pulses; 

d) a white noise generator; 
ej a linear mixer; 

fj a digital printer. 

Items d) iof) are specified in Clause 4 of I EC Publication 659. 

5.1.2 Preparation for the test 

The apparatus is connected as shown in Figure I, page 18. The MCA is set up to be compatible 
with the TAC output pulse height. 

5 (lECpageU) 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 

5.1.3 Test procedure 

The precise value of the time difference between the start and stop pulses which cover the TAC 
effective range is determined from the precision delay unit settings, together with the MCA channel 
number corresponding to this time difference. 

The exact channel number is determined by mixing the TAC output with the noise generator 
pulses so that a symmetric peak approximately ten channels FWHM is obtained. A total of 10 to 20 
measurements shall be made at regular intervals to cover each effective TAC time range. 



5. 1 .4 Processing of measurement data 

The position of each peak is determined according to Sub-clause 4.2.4 of I EC Publication 659. 
The integral non-Unearity is determined according to Sub-clause 4.4.4 of this standard for each 
TAC time range. 

5.2 Differential non-linearity 

5.2.1 Apparatus 

a) a pulse generator whose output is random in time but fixed in amplitude; 

b) a periodic pulse generator; 

c) an MCA capable of accepting the TAC output pulses; 

d) a digital printer. 

5.2.2 Preparation for a test 

The apparatus is connected as shown in Figure 2, page 18. The MCA is set up to be compatible 
with the TAC output pulse. 

5.2.3 Test procedure 

The system is allowed to accumulate sufficient counts per channel of MCA memory to produce 
good statistical accuracy. The periodic pulse generator frequency is set to sweep over the TAC range 
under test. Each TAC range shall be tested. 

5.2.4 Processing of measurement data 

The data are processed to determine the differential non-linearity using the technique described 
in Sub-clause 4.5.1.4 of I EC Publication 659. 

5.3 Changes of non-linearities due to temperature and supply voltage changes 

5.3.1 Change due to temperature changes 

The variation in differential and integral non-linearity with temperature shall be determined 
according to Sub-clauses 4.5.1.5 and 4.4.5 respectively of I EC Publication 659. 



5.3.2 Change due to supply voltage changes 

The variation in differential and integral non-linearity with supply voltage changes shall be 
determined according to Sub-clauses 4.5.1.6 and 4.4.6 respectively of I EC Publication 659. 



{lEC page 13) 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 

5.4 Time resolution 

5.4.1 Apparatus 

a) the pulse generator of Sub-clause 5.1.1 ; 

b) a precision variable delay unit; 

c) an MCA capable of accepting the TAC output pulses; 

d) a digital printer. 

5.4.2 Preparation for a test 

The apparatus is connected as shown in Figure 3, page 19. The MCA is set to give the maximum 
possible number of channels associated with the peak by digital ollsel and maximum conversion 
gain. Thjs number should preferably be not less than ten at the FWHM. 



5.4 J Test procedure 

A sufficient number of counts to ensure good statistical accurac> is obtained m the peak channel. 
This number should be not less than 10 000. The time separation peak from which time resolution 
is to be determined is arranged to fall near the top of the TAC time range. Each TAC time range is 
tested. 

The conversion gain of the system is determined from precision \ariable delay settings and the 
corresponding channel number where the peak appears. Four measurements are made at regular 
intervals over the TAC time range. 

5,4.4 Processing of the measurement data 

The conversion gain is determined by plotting a graph of channel number against pulse separa- 
tion: the result is expressed in time unit per channel (e.g. ps/channel). 

The time resolution is determined by measuring the full w^dth at half maximum (FWHM) peak 
height. If the FWHM corresponds to at least ten channels the error in determmation by simple 
techniques will be of the order of 10%. For more precise measurements, the techniques of Sub- 
clauses 4.2.4 of] EC Publication 659 may be adopted, or a computer analysis of the peak shape may 
be used. 

The time resolution shall be converted to time units using the conversion gain and specified for 
each TAC range. 



5.5 Temperature and supply voltage changes 

5.5, 1 Additional error of conversion factor due to temperature 

A lest procedure similar to that noted in Sub-clauses 3.4.2 of I EC Publication 659 shall be 
adopted. The result is expressed in units of %/''C. 

5 5.2 Additional error of conversion factor due to supply voltage changes 

A lesi procedure similar to that noted in Sub-clause 3.4.1 of lEC Pubiicaiion 659 shah be 
adopicd The rcsul; is expressed in units or**o V 



(Il-r pay- 15. 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 

5.6 Count rate capability 

5.6.1 Apparatus 

a) a pulse generator whose output is random in time but fixed in amplitude; 

b) a periodic pulse generator; 

c) a precision variable delay unit; 

d) an OR-circuit; 

e) two twofold fan-out units; 

f) a scaler. 

5.6.2 Preparation for a test 

The apparatus is connected as shown in Figure 4, page 19. The MCA is set up to be compatible 
with the TAC output pulse. 

5.6.3 Test procedure 

First, the system is allowed to accumulate sufficient counts to obtain a peak for a fixed time 
difference between the start and stop pulses at zero count rate of the random pulse generator. Then, 
the count rate of the random pulse generator is gradually increased. The random rate is recorded by 
the scaler. The change of the peak position is observed. 

The duration of the pulses from the two pulse generators shall be short enough, that means, 
remarkably shorter than the mean time difference between two pulses at the output of that pulse 
generator which is just generating the larger pulse rate. 

5.6.4 Processing of measurement data 

The count rate capability is determined from the ratio of the change in peak position to the peak 
position at zero random, pulse generator count rate, expressed in percentage. The change in peak 
position is the difference between the peak position at a stated count rate and the peak position at 
zero random pulse generator count rate. 



(IFCpage 11) 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 



























Pulse generator 






Start ^.^ 
Stop TAC 












































Variable delay 














OR<ircuit 


MCA 
























\^f^itg nrtico nonaratrkr 












yv-ri^i 












44m2 



Fig. I. — • Integral non-linearity test. 



RancJom pulse 
generator 


























f'^"^ TAC 
Stop '^^ 




MCA 








1 














Periodic pulse 
generator 










444/82 



Fig. 2. — Differential non-linearity test. 



(lEC page 19) 



IS : 12275 - 1987 
lEC Pub 741 (1982) 



Pulse generator 












Stop TAC 




MCA 














■ 












' 








Variable delay 


445/S: 



Fig. 3. — Time resolution test. 



Random pulse 
generator 


















Fan-out unit 




Scaler 






























OR-circuit 


Stop T*^ 


Input 


MCA 
















f 


N 












._. f 




r 










Periodic pulse 
generator 


1 














Fan-out unit 






Delay unit 





























Fi(i 4. — Count rate capability test. 



(lEC page 18) 



10 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



