**************** 


^  tOTH: 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New"  ' 


IS  1418  (2009) :  Determination  of   Gold  in  Gold  Bullion, 
Gold  Alloys  and  Gold  Jewellery /Artefacts  -  Cupellation 
(Fire  Assay)  Method  [MTD  10:  Precious  Metals] 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-:gv 


^^35^* 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  1418  :  2009 

( cffmr  g^^TW  ) 

Indian  Standard 

DETERMINATION  OF  GOLD  IN  GOLD  BULLION, 

GOLD  ALLOYS  AND  GOLD  JEWELLERY/ARTEFACTS  — 

CUPELLATION  (FIRE  ASSAY)  METHOD 

(  Third  Revision  ) 


ICS  39.060 


©BIS  2009 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN.  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

April  2m9  PrkeGronpJ 


Precious  Metals  Sectional  Committee,  MTD  10 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Third  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the 
Precious  Metals  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Metallurgical  Engineering  Division  Council. 

In  this  revision,  following  changes  have  been  made: 

a)  Requirements  of  proof  gold  sample  have  been  revised. 

b)  Purity  of  lead  foil,  bead  have  been  kept  at  09,9  percent  minimum. 

c)  Requirements  of  assay  balance  have  been  modified. 

d)  Clauses  8.1  and  8.2.2  have  been  modified. 

e)  Annealing  temperature  of  the  flattened  buttons  before  parting  has  been  reduced  to  700°C 
from  SOO-C^ 

f)  Clause  8.6  has  been  deleted. 

g)  Clause  8.7  has  been  aligned  with  clause  10.1, 

An  international  standard  ISO  1 1426  :  1997  'Determination  of  gold  in  gold  jewellery  alloy — Cupellation  method  (fire 
assay)'  also  exists  on  this  subject.  The  method  prescribed  for  assaying  jewellery  in  this  standard  is  identical  to  the 
method  stipulated  in  ISO  Standard.  The  standard  is  therefore  completely  aligned  with  the  ISO  Standard. 

The  methods  prescribed  in  this  standard  are  intended  to  determine  the  fineness  of  gold  in  gold  bullion,  gold  alloys  and 
gold  jewellery  artefacts  as  covered  in  IS  1417:  1999  'Gold  and  gold  alloys. jewellery. artefacts  —  Fineness  and  marking 
—  Specification  (ihirJ revision)' . 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  results  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  ;  I960 
'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (rfi/.vcc/)'.  The  numberof  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value 
should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


IS  1418:  2009 


Indian  Standard 

DETERMINATION  OF  GOLD  IN  GOLD  BULLION, 
GOLD  ALLOYS  AND  GOLD  JEWELLERY/ARTEFACTS 
CUPELLATION  (FIRE  ASSAY)  METHOD 

(  Third  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  prescribes  the  cupellation  or  fire  assay 
method  for  assaying  of  gold  in  gold  bullion,  gold  alloys, 
and  gold  jewellery/artefacts  covered  in  IS  1417. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions  which, 
through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of 
this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  edition 
indicated  was  valid.  All  standard  are  subject  to  revision 
and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this  standard  are 
encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the 
most  recent  edition  of  the  standards  indicated  below: 

IS  No.  Title 

1 070 :  1 992  Reagent  grade  water  {third  revision) 

1417:  1999  Gold  and  gold  alloys,  jewellery/artefacts 

—     Fineness     and     marking    — 
Specification  {third  revision) 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions 
shall  apply. 

3.1  Bullion  —  Precious  metals  in  the  form  of  bar,  ingot, 
plate,  etc  (refined  or  unrefined ) . 

3.2  Cupellation  —  An  oxidizing  fusion  of  lead,  gold, 
silver  and  associated  base  metals  in  a  cupel  which  absorbs 
the  lead  oxide  along  with  base  metals  oxides  leaving  a 
bead  of  gold  and  silver  (along  with  platinum  group  metals, 
ifany)  on  the  cupel. 

3  J  Fine  Gold  —  It  is  gold  having  fineness  999  parts  per 
thousand  (96o)  and  above  without  any  negative  tolerance 
and  free  from  Pb,  Hg,  Bi,  Be,  Te  and  platinum  group  metals. 

3.4  Inquartation  —  The  addition  of  silver  to  an  assay 
sample  to  facilitate  parting. 

3.5  Parting  —  Separating  silver  from  gold  by  selectively 
dissolving  the  silver  in  acid,  usually  nitric  acid. 

4  PRINCIPLE 

The  gold  alloys  are  inquarted  with  silver,  compounded 


with  lead  and  cupelled  in  a  cupellation  furnace  until  a 
precious  metal  button  is  obtained.  After  flattening  and 
rolling,  the  silver  is  extracted  (parted)  in  nitric  acid  and 
the  gold  weighed.  Possible  systematic  errors  in  the 
procedure  are  eliminated  by  assaying  standard  proof 
samples  in  parallel. 

NOTES 

1  While  gold  alloys  containing  palladium  and/or  nickel  as  well 
as  alloys  with  990  or  more  pans  per  thousand  (%o)  of  gold 
require  some  procedural  changes. 

2  If  the  bullion  contains  any  of  the  platinum  group  metals. 
the  accuracy  and  precision  cannot  be  achieved 

5  SAMPLING 

5.1  Sampling  by  Cutting  or  Drilling 

5.1.1  When  the  bullion  is  in  the  form  of  an  ingot  or  slab 
and  is  of  high  fineness,  sampling  by  'cutting"  or  'drilling' 
may  be  adopted. 

5.1.2  Cutting  Method 

Samples  are  cut  from  diagonally  opposite  comers  of  the 
upper  and  lower  sides  of  the  bar.  Cutting  is  to  be  done 
with  a  sharp  narrow  steel  chisel.  From  each  cut,  I  to  1 .5  g 
sample  may  be  taken.  The  cut  pieces  should  be  flattened, 
rolled,  cut  into  small  pieces  and  thoroughly  mixed  together. 

5.1.3  Drilling  Method 

The  ingot  is  drilled  on  the  top  comer  and  on  the  opposite 
bottom  comer  with  a  3  to  10  mm  high-speed  tool  steel 
drill.  When  it  is  known  that  ingot  is  not  of  uniform 
composition  or  is  of  low-fineness,  the  minimum  2  drillings 
should  be  taken  from  the  top  and  2  from  the  bottom  at 
diagonally  opposite  comers.  The  surface  drillings  resulting 
from  the  first  few  revolutions  of  the  drill,  should  be  rejected 
till  the  hole  on  the  ingot  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the 
drill.  The  drilling  should  be  carried  out  to  a  little  more  than 
half-way  through  the  ingot.  The  minimum  weight  of 
drillings  from  the  above  4  borings  should  not  be  less  than 
5  g.  In  case  of  fine  gold  the  drillings  should  be  cut  into 
small  pieces  and  mi.xed  thoroughly  before  taking  up  for 
assay .  In  case  of  low-fineness  samples,  4  lots  of  drillings 
may  be  assayed  separately  or  2  lots  from  the  top  may  be 
mixed  to  form  one  sample  and  2  lots  from  the  bottom  mixed 


I 


IS  1418 -.2009 


for  a  second  sample.  When  the  material  is  in  the  form  of 
sheet  or  wire,  small  pieces  shall  be  cut  preferably  from 
opposite  ends  and  thoroughly  mixed  together. 

NOTES 

1  In  case  the  sample  is  found  lo  be  non-homogeneous  by- 
assaying,  the  method  as  given  in  5.2  should  be  adopted  for 
sampling 

2  Sampling  for  assaying  jewellery  shall  be  done  by  scrapping 
or  by  cutting  after  removing  the  surface  colour/coating  or  as 
agreed  upon 

3  When  the  composition  of  the  samples  is  unknown,  use  a 
prelimmary  assay  for  the  estimation  of  the  fmeness  of  gold. 
For  the  distinction  between  palladium  and  nickfel  white  golds, 
the  touchstone  test  can  also  be  used  If  the  cornet  breaks  up 
during  the  parting  process,  this  is  often  an  indication  of  excess 
silver. 

4  Sampling  procedure  for  jewellery  shall  be  agreed  upon  until  a 
corresponding  standard  method  Is  published. 

5.2  Dip  Sampling 

When  the  bullion/jewellery  has  been  melted  it  should  be 
stirred  well  with  a  preheated  graphite  stirrer  and  a  dip 
sample  of  about  5  g  taken  with  a  preheated  graphite 
sampler  from  the  molten  metal  from  the  middle  of  the  pot 
just  before  casting.  The  sample  may  be  granulated  or  cast 
into  a  small  button  or  allowed  to  solidity  in  the  sampler. 
This  may  be  rolled  and  cut  into  small  pieces  for  assaying. 
The  granules  may  be  hammered,  if  necessary,  for  complete 
removal  of  trapped  water.  Alternatively  quartz  tube  may 
also  be  used  for  drawing  dip  sample. 

NOTES 

1  In  case  of  dispute  with  regard  to  sampling  of  ingot,  slab,  bar, 
sheet  or  wire  or  jewellery  a  dip'  sample  shall  be  taken  from  the 
representative  lot. 

2  Granulation  of  the  sample  is  not  satisfactory  for  bullion  of 
low-fineness  as  during  pouring  of  the  molten  metal  into  water 
some  of  the  base  metals  present  may  oxidize,  thus  altering  the 
composition  of  the  sample 

3  Before  taking  samples  by  an\.  of  the  abo\e  methods,  all 
surface  dirt  from  the  article  shall  be  removed  and  all  instruments 
for  cutting,  scrapping,  hammering,  etc.  shall  be  cleaned 
thoroughly  No  oil  shall  be  used  for  drilling 

4  When  the  bar  has  been  pickled  by  dipping  in  acid  at^cr  casting, 
the  surface  shall  be  well  scrapped  before  sampling  The  first 
ponion  of  metal  removed  during  the  preparation  of  the  sample 
shall  be  rejected 

6  REAGENTS 

6.1  Unless  specified  otherwise,  pure  chemicals  and 
distilled  water  (see  IS  1 070)  or  water  of  equivalent  purity 
free  from  halides  and  suspended  impurities  shall  be 
employed  in  the  tests. 

NOTE  —  Pure  chemicals'  shall  mean  chemicals  that  do  not 
contain  impurities  which  affect  the  results  of  analysis 

6.2  Bora.v{NajB^O,),  anhydrous. 

6.3  Pure  Gold  for  Proof  Samples 


Gold  of  minimum  purity  999.9  parts  per  thousand  (%o)  by 
mass. 

6.4  Copper  FoilAVire  or  Disc 

Minimum  purity  of  999  parts  per  thousand  (%o)  by  mass 
and  free  from  gold  and  platinum  group  metals. 

6.5  Lead  Foil 

Lead,  foil  and  beads,  assay  grade  minimum  purity  999 
parts  per  thousands  by  mass  (96o)  and  free  from  gold, 
bismuth  and  platinum  group  metals. 

6.6  Nickel 

Minimum  purity  999  parts  per  thousand  (%o)  by  mass, 
free  of  gold  and  platinum  group  metals. 

6.7  Palladium 

Minimum  purity  999.9  parts  per  thousand  (%«)  by  mass, 
free  of  gold  and  platinum  group  metals. 

6.8  Parting  Acid  No.  I 

Dilute  nitric  acid  specific  gravity  1.2  (g/cm^)  free  from 
halides  and  suspended  matter. 

6.9  Parting  Acid  No.  2 

Dilute  nitric  acid  specific  gravity  1.3  (g/cm^)  free  from 
halides  and  suspended  matter. 

6.10  Silver 

Silver  of  fineness  999  (%o),  Min  and  free  from  gold  and 
platinum  group  metals. 

NOTE  —  The  presence  of  elements  beyond  three  decimals  of 
purity  may  be  considered  as  freedom  from  purity 

7  ASSAY  BALANCE 

7.1  It  is  a  balance  with  sensitivity  0.002  mg  for  assaying 
gold  sample  up  to  990  fineness.  For  assaying  of  gold 
alloys  above  990  fineness,  the  sensitivity  0.001  mg  is 
required. 

7.2  Assay  Cleaning  Brush 

It  is  a  brush  with  stiff  bristles  or  nylon  but  not  brass. 

7.3  Balling  Pliers 

A  pair  of  steel  pliers  with  smooth  concave  chops,  the 
diameter  of  the  cavity  in  the  chops  being  about  10  mm. 

".4  Cupels 

Made  of  calcium  phosphate  or  magnesia  usually  of 
diameter  1 6  mm  to  absorb  4  g  lead,  22  mm  to  absorb  6  g 
lead  or  26  mm  to  absorb  10  g  lead  or  block  of  cupels  of 
similar  absorbance. 


IS  1418:2009 


7.5  Cupellation  Furnace 

It  is  muffle  type  furnace  provided  with  inlets  and  outlets 
for  air  for  maintaining  an  oxidizing  atmosphere  constantly 
during  operation.  The  muffle  shall  be  capable  of  being 
heated  uniformly  up  to  a  temperature  of  I  1 50°C. 

7.6  Hammer  and  Anvil 

These  shall  have  bright  and  clean  striking  faces.  The 
hammer  shall  have  a  minimum  mass  of  400  g.  This  may  be 
replaced  by  a  press,  polished  and  reserved  for  this 
purpose. 

7.7  Parting  Flasks  or  Platinum  Basket 

7.8  Parting  Tray 

A  number  of  small  thimble  like  perforated  cups  of  Pt  or 
Pt/Ir  or  Pt/Rh  or  unglazed  silica  supported  in  a  frame  of 
the  same  material. 

7.9  Rolling  Mills 

A  small  jewellers  rolling  mill. 

7.10  Scorification  Dishes 

Usually  of  diameter  50  mm. 

7.11  Tongs  and  Forceps 

■"      Of  various  forms  for  changing  the  cupels  and  handling 
assay-pieces,  etc. 

7.12  Trays 

Of  various  forms  for  keeping  the  assay-pieces, 
buttons,  rolls,  fillets,  comets,  etc. 

8  PROCEDURE  FOR  ASSAYING  GOLD  IN  GOLD 
BULLION  ANDGOLD  ALLOYS 

8.1    Weighing  of  Sample 

Weigh  at  least  two  samples  of  the  alloy  each  of  500  mg  to 
an  accuracy  of  0.002  mg.  If  sample  mass  is  insufficient, 
take  preferably  250  mg  (in  duplicate)  weigh  ing  to  the  same 
accuracy.  In  case  of  white  gold  containing  nickel,  take 
250  mg  sample  in  duplicate.  Run  a  proof  assay  in  duplicate 
adding  same  quantity  of  nickel  as  present  in  the  test 
sample. 

The  mass  of  lead  foil  (or  foil  +  lead  beads)  should  be  8  g 
(approximately)  for  sample  of  500  mg  and  4  g  for  250  mg 
sample.  In  case  of  white  gold,  containing  nickel,  effective 
cupellation  requires  an  addition  of4g  of  lead,  larger  cupels 
and  additional  time  tor  completion.  Incaseof375and585 
carat  gold,  take  250  mg  samjiie  in  duplicate  and  extra 
amouni  of  lead  4  g  and  2  g  respectively  towards  the  end 
oftupellalion  and  allow  sutTicient  time  for  completion  of 
cupellation  Proof  assays  are  also  to  be  treated  in  the 
same  manner. 


8.2  Preparation  of  the  Assay-Piece 

8.2. 1  In  making  up  the  assay-piece  add  enough  silver  to 
the  sample  so  as  to  make  up  the  total  silver  content 
between  2.3  and  3.0  times  the  mass  of  gold  present  in  the 
sample  allowing  for  the  silver  already  present  in  the 
sample. 

8.2.2  Weigh  as  in  8.1  at  least  two  proof  assay  samples  of 
proof  gold  {see  6.3)  and  pure  silver  in  masses  which 
correspond  to  the  expected  gold  and  silver  content 
(including  inquartation  addition)  of  the  assay  sample.  The 
total  content  of  base  metals  in  the  assay  samples  is  taken 
into  consideration  by  addition  of  corresponding  quantity 
ofcopper(.vet?6.4). 

8.2.3  Wrap  the  weighed  sample  together  with  the  required 
amount  of  silver  and  copper  in  the  lead-foil  and  squeeze 
them  in  the  balling  pliers  to  form  small  balls.  The  assay- 
piece  shall  now  be  considered  ready  for  charging  in  the 
cupellation  furnace. 

8.3  Preliminary  Assay 

If  the  approximate  composition  of  the  sample  of  gold  alloy 
is  not  known,  it  is  necessar>'  to  make  a  preliminary  assay. 
For  this  purpose,  weigh  2  lots  of  100  mg  of  the  alloy, 
add  300  mg  of  silver  to  one  lot  and  then  wrap  each  lot 
separately  in  3  g  of  lead.  Cupel  both  side  by  side  .  Flatten 
the  button  containing  the  added  silver  and  boil  in  1 5  ml  of 
parting  acid  No.  2  for  1 5  min,  wash  the  resulting  gold,  dr> 
and  heat  to  redness  and  weigh.  The  weight  in  milligrams 
gives  directly  the  percentage  of  gold,  and  the  weight  in 
milligrams  of  other  button  gives  the  percentage  of  gold 
and  silver  together,  the  difference  between  the  two  gives 
the  percentage  of  silver  The  remainder  will  be  base  metal. 
When  the  approximate  composition  of  the  alloy  has  been 
ascertained,  determine  the  amount  of  silver  to  be  added 
for  assay.  Alternatively,  preliminary  assay  can  be  done  by 
other  method  such  as  XRF,  ICP.  AAS,  etc. 

8.4  Cupellation 

Arrange  the  cupels  carefully  in  the  muffle  furnace, 
preferably  on  a  removable  tray.  When  the  furnace 
temperature  is  of  about  I  050  - 1  100°C,  place  in  them  the 
assay-pieces  and  the  proof  assay  samples  each  in  its 
proper  cupel,  by  means  of  a  pair  of  long  cupellation  tongs. 
The  charging  should  be  done  carefully,  but  as  rapidly  as 
possible,  so  as  not  to  cool  the  muffle  furnace  unduly. 
Alternatively  mechanical  device  may  be  used  for 
charging  all  the  samples  at  a  time.  Close  the  muffle  door 
and  allow  the  cupellation  to  proceed  for  20  to  30  min 
depending  on  the  amount  of  lead  used,  the  temperature 
being  raised  to  about  I  I  OO^C  towards  the  end.  The  end  of 
the  cupellation  is  shown  by  the  appearance  of  bright 
globules  ofgold-silveralloy.  The  cupels  may  be  withdrawn 
while  the  temperature  comes  down  to  approximately  850°C 


IS  1418  :  2009 


in  the  furnace  till  the  buttons  are  solidified  and  then 
removed  from  the  furnace. 

8.5  Preparing  the  Assay-Piece  for  Parting 

8.5.1  Remove  the  buttons  from  the  cupels  by  means  of 
pair  of  forceps  and  clean  with  a  stiff  brush.  Flatten  the 
buttons  on  a  polished  anvil  with  a  polished  hammer. 
Anneal  the  flattened  buttons  at  about  700°C  and  pass  in 
succession  through  the  rolls  to  form  elongated  fillets  of 
thickness  0.22  to  0.25  mm  and  number  them  serially.  After 
being  rolled,  anneal  again  to  soften  them  and  then 
separately  roll  up  between  the  finger  and  thumb  into  a 
comet  or  spiral;  making  the  lower  side  of  the  button  the 
outer  face  of  the  comet. 

8.5.2  Place  the  comets  in  the  respective  cups  of  the 
parting  tray  and  immerse  the  entire  tray  in  parting  acid 
No.  I  at  a  temperature  of  90-95°C  and  boil  for  25  to  30  min 
or  until  no  more  nitrous  fumes  are  observed.  Take  out  the 
tray  and  drain  from  acid  liquor,  then  wash  by  dipping  in 
and  out  of  a  vessel  of  hot  distilled  water,  drain  again  and 
immerse  in  a  second  lot  of  boiling  parting  acid  No.  2.  Boil 
the  comets  in  this  way  for  20  to  25  min,  drain  and  wash 
thoroughly  till  the  washing  is  free  from  silver  nitrate.  Dry 
the  tray  with  the  comets  by  gently  heating  and  then  anneal 
in  a  muffle  furnace  heated  to  800°C  for  about  5  min. 

8.6  Proof  Assays 

The  proof  samples  shall  be  subjected  to  the  same 
operations  side  by  side  and  under  identical  conditions 
with  the  assay-pieces.  The  number  of  proof  samples  shall 
be  not  less  than  two  in  each  group  of  assay  and  shall  be 
positioned  evenly  in  the  group. 

8.7  Expression  of  Results 

8.7. 1  Method  of  Calculation 

Calculate  the  gold  content,  W  in  parts  per  thousand  (%o) 
by  mass,  of  the  alloy  using  the  formula: 

m,  +  A 
W= = X  10^ 

where 

m,  =  mass  of  the  sample,  in  mg; 
m,  =  mass  of  the  sample  comet,  in  mg;  and 
A    =  average  value  of  the  proof  assay  gold  mass 
minus  the  comet  mass  of   the  proof  assay 
sample,  in  mg. 

8.7.2  Repeatability 

Duplicate  determination  shall  give  results  differina  bv 
maximum  0.5  parts  perthousand(%o)by  mass  for  yellow 
and  red  gold  alloys,  maximum  1 .0  pan  per  thousand  (%o) 
by  mass  for  white  gold  alloys  and  maximum  0.2  parts  per 
thousand  (%o)  for  gold  alloys  containing  990  part  per 


thousands  or  more  gold.  If  the  difference  is  greater  than 
this,  the  assay  shall  be  repeated.  When  analyzing  alloys 
with  a  fine  gold  content  of  990  (%o)  or  more,  the  values  of 
A  for  the  proof  samples  (see  8.6)  which  run  in  parallel 
shall  not  differ  by  more  than  0.04  mg.  If  the  difference  is 
greater  than  this,  the  assay  shall  be  repeated. 

9  PROCEDURE  FOR  ASSAYING  GOLD  IN  GOLD 
JEWELLERY/ARTEFACTS 

9.1  Yellow  Gold  Alloys 

9.1.1  Analysis  Samples 

Transfer  at  least  two  samples  of  the  alloy,  preferably 
between  125  mg  and  250  mg  weighed  to  the  nearest 
±  0.0 1  mg,  into  assay-grade  lead-foil.  The  mass  of  the  foil 
(or  foil  +  beads)  should  be  at  least  4  g  for  yellow  gold 
samples  up  to  200  mg,  and  6  g  for  samples  from  20 1  mg  to 
300  mg  (250  mg).  Add  pure  silver  equivalent  to  2.3  to  3 
times  the  mass  of  fine  gold  present.  Roll  and  compress 
the  lead  foil  into  a  tight  ball. 

9.1.2  Proof  Assay  Samples 

Weigh,  as  in  9.1.1  at  least  two  proof  assay  samples  of 
proof  gold  and  pure  silver  in  masses  which  correspond  to 
the  expected  gold  and  silver  contents  (including  the 
inquartation  addition)  of  the  assay  sample.  The  total 
content  of  base  metals  in  the  assay  samples  is  taken  into 
consideration  by  the  addition  of  a  corresponding  quantity 
of  copper.  Treat  the  proof  assay  samples  and  the  assay 
samples  in  9.1.2  and  9.1.1  in  the  same  manner. 

9.1.3  Cupellation  and  Treatment  of  Precious  Metal 
Buttons 

Place  the  assay  and  the  proof  assay  samples  (see  9.1.2) 
tightly  wrapped  in  lead  foil,  on  magnesium  oxide  cupels 
which  have  been  preheated  to  at  least  I  I00°C  in  the 
cupellation  furnace. 

Place  the  cupels  with  the  proof  assay  samples  as  close  as 
possible  to  the  corresponding  assay  samples  in  the 
cupellation  furnace  maintained  at  I  050°C-I  I00°C. 
Continue  heating  until  this  stage  is  completed  (about 
25  min)  under  oxidizing  conditions.  Remove  the  cupels 
from  the  furnace.  Allow  the  precious  metal  buttons  to 
cool  down  before  lifting  them  from  the  cupels  with  the 
assay  pliers.  Squeeze  the  buttons  and  brush  their 
undersides  carefully  with  a  brush  to  remove  any  adhering 
cupel  material.  Flatten  the  beads  on  the  polished  anvil 
with  a  polished  hammer  and  anneal  by  heating  just  to  red 
heat  700°C. 

Roll  them  into  0.12  to  0.15  mm  thick  strips  and  anneal 
again.  Roll  the  strips  into  cornets  without  contamination 
or  loss  of  gold. 

It  may  be  noted  that  the  cupel  should  be  examined  carefully 


IS  1418:  2009 


to  ensure  that  the  precious  metal  bead  contains  all  the 
sample  gold.  Small  droplet  residues  indicate  the  need  for 
a  repeat  determination  in  a  smaller  cupel. 

9.1.4    Parting  of  the  Silver/Gold  Samples 

Place  the  precious  metal  comets  in  parting  flasks.  First 
immerse  the  comet  in  20  ml  of  nitric  acid  {see  6.8)  at  a 
temperature  at  least  5°C  below  the  boiling  point  and  bring 
to  the  boil. 

Continue  heating  for  15  min  or  until  the  evolution  of 
nitrous  fumes  has  ceased,  whichever  is  longer,  decant, 
wash  with  warm  water  and  immerse  in  20  ml  of  nitric  acid 
{see  6.9)  and  boil  for  1 0  min.  Decant  and  wash  the  gold 
comet  with  warm  water  at  60°  to  70°C  until  it  is  free  of 
silver  nitrate.  Transfer  the  gold  comets  to  small  porous 
parting  cups  (porcelain  crucible).  Dry  them  and  anneal  at 
700°  to  750°C  for  about  5  min.  Cool,  and  then  weigh  the 
gold  comet. 

When  assaying  a  series  of  samples  of  sim  ilar  composition, 
instead  of  using  a  number  of  parting  flasks  the  preciou's 
metal  comet  can  be  parted  with  the  aid  of  a  dissolution 
basket  consisting  of  Pt/lr  or  Pt/Rh  which  is  equipped 
with  a  number  of  quartz,  Pt/lr  or  Pt/Rh  thimbles  with 
perforated  bottoms.  The  cornets  are  placed  in  the 
thimbles  and  basket  is  lowered  slowly  into  nitric  acid 
{see  6.8)  at  about  90°C.  The  acid  is  brought  to  the  boil  and 
allowed  to  boil  gently  for  1 5  min  or  until  the  evolution  of 
nitrous  fumes  has  ceased,  whichever  is  longer  Remove 
the  basket  fi-om  the  acid,  rinse  in  water  repeat  the  treatment 
in  a  second  batch  of  nitric  acid  {see  6.9)  and  boil  again  for 
15  min. 

Remove  the  basket  from  the  acid,  rinse  it  with  warm 
(60°  to  70°C)  water  until  it  is  completely  free  of  silver  nitrate 
and  allow  to  dry.  Finally  place  the  basket  with  the  gold 
samples  for  about  5  min  in  muffle  furnace,  heated  to 
approximately  700°  to  750°C.  After  cooling,  the  gold 
samples  shall  be  weighed. 

CAUTION  —  For  the  parting  operations  with  nitric  acid,  a 
fume  hood  should  be  kept  clean  and  used  exclusively  for  this 
determination. 

9.2  White  Gold  Alloy  Containing  Nickel 

If  nickel  is  present,  two  equivalent  variations  on  the 
method  specified  in  this  standard  are  acceptable.  These 
involve  either  the  use  of  additional  lead  or  scoriflcation. 

9.2.1    Cupellation  with  Additional  Lead 

it  is  difficult  to  extract  all  the  nickel  in  the  alloy  into  the 
cupel  by  using  the  standard  quantity  of  lead.  Effective 
cupellation  requires  an  additional  4  g  of  lead  and  the  use 
of  larger  cupels.  This  extra  lead  may  be  incorporated  at 
the  start  of  the  test,  if  the  cupel  is  large  enough  to  contain 
the  increased  volume  of  melt.  Alternatively  a  button  of 


lead  is  added  to  the  hot  precious  metal  bead  in  the  cupel 
after  the  lead  oxide  fumes  from  the  initial  operation  have 
ceased.  Care  is  needed  if  the  cupellation  fumace  is  not 
adopted  for  this  addition. 

The  proof  assays  should  contain  approximately  the  same 
proportion  of  nickel  as  the  sample. 

9.2.2  Scoriflcation 

For  white  gold  alloys  containing  nickel,  pretreatment  of 
the  sample  by  scoriflcation  involves  wrapping  it  in  2  g  of 
lead  foil.  The  sample  consists  of  125  to  250  mg  of  gold 
and  is  inquarted  with  silver  equivalent  to  2.3  to  3  times 
the  mass  of  fine  gold  present.  Place  this  capsule  in  a 
scoriflcation  dish,  together  with  15  g  of  lead  and  1.5  to 
2  g  of  anhydrous  borax  and  heat  to  1  000°C  in  the  fiimace. 
An  increased  air  supply  may  be  needed  to  oxidize  the 
large  quantity  of  lead.  After  20  to  30  min,  when  a  liquid 
slag  covers  the  surface  of  the  dish,  raise  the  temperature 
briefly  to  I  1 00°C( for  about  2  min).  Remove  the  dish  with 
the  tongs,  cool  and  separate  the  lead  button  from  the 
slag.  This  button,  which  contains  the  original  gold  and 
silver,  is  cupelled  as  described  in  9.1.3, 

9.3  White  Gold  Alloys  Containing  Palladium  (Nickel 
Absent) 

For  white  gold  alloys  containing  palladium,  traces  of  this 
metal  may  remain  in  the  comet  after  a  single  cupellation 
and  palling.  With  these  alloys,  the  comet  from  the  samples 
and  the  proof  assays  should  be  recupelled  with  4  g  of 
lead,  silver  equal  to  2.5  times  the  mass  of  gold  and  a  small 
piece  (about  50  mg)  of  copper  Repeat  the  parting  process 
and  weigh  the  final  comets. 

The  proof  assay  should  contain  approximately  the  same 
amount  of  palladium  at  the  sample. 

9.4  Gold  Alloys  Incorporating  More  than  40  Percent 
Silver 

These  alloys  shall  be  treated  as  yellow  gold  alloys,  with 
proper  allowance  being  made  for  the  higher  silver  content 
when  determining  the  inquartation  addition. 

9.5  Alloys  Containing  990  (X.)  and  Above  GoW 

When  analyzing  samples  containing  approximately 
990  (%o)  gold,  still  increased  accuracy  in  operation  and 
parameter  control  is  needed. 

In  order  to  achieve  the  best  results,  proceed  as  stated 
in  9.1,  introducing  the  following  modifications: 

a)  Weigh  at  least  250  mg  of  alloy;  add  20  ±  5  mg  of 
copper  to  the  sample  and  amount  of  inquartation 
silver  as  stated  in  8.2.1; 

b)  For  the  proof  assay  samples,  proceed  exactly  in  the 
same  way  as  for  the  assay  sample.  Use  gold  of 
purity  999.9  (%o)  and  take  care  the  mass  of  the  added 


IS  1418  :  2009 


inquartation  silver  is  in  the  same  range  ±  10  mg)  as 
for  the  assay  samples.  Always  run  in  parallel  at  least 
two  proof  assay  samples; 

c)  Carry  out  the  cupellation  with  a  total  amount  of  at 
least  2  g  of  lead; 

d)  After  cupellation,  flatten  all  beads  so  that  they  have 
approximately  the  same  shape  and  thickness;  anneal 
the  flattened  beads  in  a  muffle  to  red  heat  (700°C)  to 
obtain  the  same  condition  of  recrystallization;  and 

e)  Proceed  to  the  parting  of  the  samples  as  stated  in 
9.1.4.  Take  care  that  the  quantity  of  acid  and  the 
parting  time  are  the  same  for  ail  samples  of  the  same 
series.  Finally,  dry  and  anneal  in  parallel  all  fine  gold 
comets.  The  use  of  a  basket  for  the  parting  will  be 
advantageous  for  this  purpose. 

NOTE  —  The  cupellation  will  tal<e  about  15  min. 
10  EXPRESSION  OF  RESULTS 

lO.i  Method  of  Calculation 

Calculate  the  gold  content,  W  in  parts  per  thousand  (%o) 
by  mass,  of  the  alloy  using  the  formula: 

m  +  A 
W  = X  10' 

where 

OT|  =  mass  of  the  sample,  in  mg; 

m,  =  mass  of  the  sample  comet,  comet  in  mg;  and 

A    =  average  value  of  the  proof  assay  gold,  in  mg 

minus  the  cornet  mass  of  the  proof  assay 

sample,  in  milligrams. 


10.2  Repeatability 

Duplicate  determination  shall  give  results  differing  by 
maximum  0.5  parts  per  thousand  (%o)  b>  mass  for  yellow 
and  red  gold  alloys,  maximum  1 .0  part  per  thousand  (%o) 
by  mass  for  white  gold  alloys  and  maximum  0.2  parts  per 
thousand  (%o)  by  mass  for  gold  alloys  containing 
990  (%o)  or  more  gold.  If  the  difference  is  greater  than  this, 
the  assay  shall  be  repeated. 

When  analyzing  alloys  with  a  fine  gold  content  of 
990  (%o)  or  more,  the  values  of  A  for  the  proof  samples 
(see  9.1 )  which  run  in  parallel  shall  not  differ  by  more  than 
0.04  mg.  If  the  difference  is  greater  than  this,  the  assay 
shall  be  repeated. 

II  TEST  REPORT 

The  test  report  shall  include  the  following  information; 

a)  identification  of  the  sample  including  source,  date 
of  receipt,  form  of  sample; 

b)  Sampling  procedure; 

c)  The  method  used  by  reference  to  this  standard; 

d)  Gold  content  of  the  sample,  in  parts  per  thousand 

(%o)  by  mass,  as  single  and  mean  values; 

e)  If  relevant  any  deviations  from  the  method 
specified  in  this  standard; 

f)  Any  unusual   features  observed  during  the 
determination; 

g)  Date  of  test; 

h)  Identification  of  the  laboratory  carrying  out  the 
analysis;  and 

j)    Signature  of  laboratory  manager  and  operator. 


GMGIPN— 24  BIS/ND/09— 300 


Bureau  oflndian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  oflndian  Standards  Act,  1 986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  the  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing 
the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating 
to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  oflndian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  alongwith  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  oflndian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of 'BIS  Catalogue'  and  "Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  MTD  10  (4795). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10  002 

Telephones:  2323  0131,  2323  3375,  2323  9402  PVebsite:  www.bis.org.in 

Regional  Offices  :  Telephones 


Central  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 

NEWDELHII10002 


2323  7617 
2323  3841 


Eastern  :      1/ 14  C.l.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I. R  Road,  Kankurgachi  {2337  8499,23378561 

KOLKATA700054  12337  8626,23379120 

Northern  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  (2603843 

12609285 

Southern  :      C.l.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  6001 13  |  2254  1216,2254  1442 

12254  2519,2254  2315 

Western  :      Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC.  Marol.  Andheri  (East)  [2832  9295,2832  7858 

MUMBAI400093  12832  7891,2832  7892 

Branches  AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 

GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM. 

PRINTED  BY  THE  GENERAL  MANAGER,  GOVT.  OF  INDIA  mCSS,  NASHIK-422  f6 


