**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11519 (1985) : Piezoelectric Ceramic Cartridge for 
Squeeze Type Electronic Gas Lighters [LITD 5: Semiconductor 
and Other Electronic Components and Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS f 11579 - I98S 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

PIEZOELECTRIC CERAMIC 

CARTRIDGE FOR SQUtbZb TYPE 

ELECTRONIC GAS LIGHTERS 



UDC 662 593-S38;6G6 655 




<S> Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BflAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 2 -/w^ J 986 



IS : 11519 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

PIEZOELECTRIC CERAMIC 

CARTRIDGE FOR SQUEEZE TYPE 

ELECTRONIC GAS LIGHTERS 



Piezoelectric Devices for Frequency Control and 
Selection Sectional Committee, LTDC 12 



Chairman Representing 

Dr V. N. Bindal National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 



Members 

Shri J. K. Bhattacharya Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri M. P. Sama ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. D. Jain Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 
Shri S. Janakiraman Directorate of Co-ordination ( Police Wireless ), New 

Delhi 
Shri R. P. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Natraj Indian Telephone Industries, Bangalore 

Shri EL S. Ananthanarayana Rao 
( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Prabhakaran Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri R. Srinivasa Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri W. V. B. Ramalingam All India Radio, New Delhi 

Smt Sudha Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. Saha Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute (CSIR ), 

Calcutta 
Shri Annamalai ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Shahul Hameed Kerala State Electronics Development Corporation 

Ltd, Cannanore 
Shri K. P. N. Kutty ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. B. V. Shanbhogue Ministry of Defence (R&D), Bangalore 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 11519 -1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri Narendra Sharma Department of Telecommunication Board, New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Bawa ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri B. K. Sharma 
Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 

Panel for Piezoelectric Ceramic Materials 
and Its Devices, LTDC 12/P1 

Convener 
Dr V. N. Bindal National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri G. S. Dhami Armament Research & Development Establishment 

( Ministry of Defence ), Pune 

Shri S. V. Pingale ( Alternate ) 
Dr J D. Jain Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 
Dr Janardhan Singh National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri A. Kashyap Concord Electroceramic Industries, Delhi 

Smt V. Kashyap ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. L. Mukherjee Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. S. Ramamoorthy National Physical Oceanographic Laboratory, Cochin 

Dr B. V. Rao Central Electronics Ltd, Sahibabad 



IS : 11519 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

PIEZOELECTRIC CERAMIC 

CARTRIDGE FOR SQUEEZE TYPE 

ELECTRONIC GAS LIGHTERS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 29 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Piezoelectric 
Devices for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division 
Council. 

0.2 The object of this standard is primarily to prescribe the general 
requirement and methods of tests in respect of piezoelectric ceramic 
cartridge used in squeeze type electronic gas lighters. 

0.3 The piezoelectric ceramic cartridge is an essential part of electronic 
( domestic ) gas lighters; when assembled in a striking mechanism 
( squeeze type ) applying compressive force, a high voltage is generated 
across spark gap. 

0.4 This standard shall be referred to read in conjunction with IS: 11013- 
1984* for the purpose of concerned elements. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS:2-1960|. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard deals with the general requirements and methods of tests 
for piezoelectric ceramic cartridge used in squeeze type electronic 
( domestic ) gas lighters. 

♦Specification for piezoelectric ceramic elements ( impact type and squeeze type ) for 
gas lighters, 
f Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS: 11519 -1985 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the terms and definitions given in 
IS: 1885 ( Part 44)-1978* shall apply. 

3. MATERIALS, CONSTRUCTION, WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

3.1 Materials — The piezoelectric ceramic elements used in the cartridge 
shall have the material properties in accordance with Type 4 of IS: 11014 
(Part3)-1985|. 

3.2 Construction — Two piezoelectric ceramic elements are used in the 
cartridge, an insulation covering is made of polypropylene or high density 
polythene, the other parts such as washers, metal parts are shown in Fig. 1. 

-wire 




10 



6-5 



■ —^L n 'ir 1111 ?— - 



-29- 
- 39- 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Piezoelectric Ceramic Cartridge for Squeeze 
Type Electronic Gas Lighters 

3,2.1 High Voltage is generated by applying compressive force in two 
piezoelectric ceramic elements joined end to end through a central terminal 
with the positive electrodes opposing each other. The other faces of the 
elements are connected to the striking mechanism through metal parts. 
Sparks are generated across discharge gap while applying compressive force 
through a level system and also when the force is being released. 

3.3 Workmanship — All parts of the piezoelectric ceramic cartridge shall 
be manufactured in accordance with good engineering practices. 

3.4 Finish — All exposed metal parts shall be manufactured from materials 
of corrosion resistant or shall be treated to resist corrosion. 

4. MARKING 

4.1 Each piezoelectric cartridge shall be marked with manufacturer's name 
or trade-mark, or manufacturer's code number, indelibly and legibly. 

♦Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 44 Piezoelectric devices. 
fSpecification for piezoelectric ceramic materials: Part 3 Type 4 and 8. 



IS: 11519 -1985 

4.2 Each piezoelectric ceramic cartridge may also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for 
conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards 
Institution. 

5. CLASSIFICATION OF TESTS 

5.1 Type Tests — The manufacturer shall submit samples in accordance 
with 5.1.1 and the sequence of type tests shall be as given in 5.1.2. 

5.1.1 Number of Samples — The number of samples for type test shall 
be twelve (12) of same code number, unless otherwise stated in the relevant 
specification. 

5.1.2 Sequence of Type Test — The sequence of type test shall be in 
accordance with Table 1 unless otherwise specified in the relevant 
specification. 



TABLE 1 SEQUENCE OF TYPE TEST 



Clause Number 

(3) 
6.1 
6.2 
7.1 

7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
8.1 
9.1 



SlNo 


.. . Test 


0) 


(2) 


i) 


Visual examination 


ii) 


Dimensions 


iii) 


Capacitance 


iv) 


Output voltage 


v) 


Durability 


vi) 


Insulation 


vii) 


Insulation resistance 


viii) 


Heat resistance 


ix) 


Humidity characteristics 


x) 


Moisture characteristics 



IS: 11519 -1985 

5.2 The following tests shall constitute routine tests and shall be carried 
out on each piezoelectric ceramic cartridge: 

a) Visual examination (6.1 ), 

b) Dimensions ( 6*2 ), 

c) Capacitance ( 7.1 ), and 

d) Output voltage (7.2). 

5.3 Acceptance Tests — The acceptance tests shall be carried out on a 

limited number of samples, selected in accordance with IS: 10673-1983* 
from the lot which has been subjected to and satisfactorily completed the 
routine tests specified in 5.2. 

Two groups of samples one for non-destructive tests ( Group A ) 
and another for destructive tests (Group B) shall be selected in accordance 
with IS: 10673-1983* and the samples in each group shall be subjected to 
the tests as given in Table 2. 





TABLE 2 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 




Test 


Clause 

Number 


AQL *Inspection 
( Percent Level 
Perfective ) 


tN/D 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) (4) 


(5) 


Group A 








Visual examination 


6.1 


1 II 


N 


Insulation 


7.4 






Insulation resistance 


7.5 






Group B 








Durability 


7.3 


4 S-3 


D 


Visual examination 


6.1 







Note — Samples which have been subjected to destructive tests shall not be 
returned to the lot. 

*IS: 10673-1983 Sampling plans and procedures for inspection by attributes for 
electronic items. 

tTV for non-destructive tests and D for destructive tests. 



♦Sampling plans and procedures for inspection by attributes for electronic items. 

6 



IS : 11519 - 1985 

6. GENERAL TESTS 

6.1 Visual Examination — The piezoelectric ceramic cartridge shall be tested 
visually for workmanship, finish, condition and marking, and these shall be 
satisfactory. 

6.2 Dimensions — The dimensions shall be checked for compliance with 
those specified in the relevent specification and as per manufacturer 
drawings. 

7. ELECTRICAL TESTS 

7.1 Capacitance — The capacitance of piezoelectric ceramic cartridge may 
be measured at 1 KHz in an LCR Bridge and it will depend on the size of 
the element in the cartridge. The capacitance value of piezoelectric 
ceramic cartridge for squeeze type shall be 36 pF (Min) and 53*8 pF (Max) 
for the elements of 6*35 mm dia and 15 mm length. The dielectric 
constant calculated from the capacitance and the size of the element, shall 
be 1 200 ± 20 percent. 

t Capacitance x thickness 
Dielectric Constant (K, ) = A reax 8-86x10-^ 

7.2 Output Voltage — The output voltage is determined by dropping a 
steel ball of 11-8 g (size 14 mm dia) from a height of 50 cm to the 
surface of capital of the cartridge. The output voltage is measured from 
the waveform on the CRT of oscilloscope with a frequency response dc to 
50 KHz. The output voltage shall be more than 10 kV. 

7.3 Durability — The durability of piezoelectric ceramic cartridge shall be 
tested in an accelerated test jig. The cartridge shall withstand at least 
10 000 squeezes at the speed of six drivings a minute under normal tempera- 
ture and generate output voltage across a discharge gap of 3 mm while 
testing. The output voltage shall be more than 85 percent of the original 
output voltage. 

Note — This test may be carried out for a particular batch taking 10 percent as the 
sample. 

7.4 Insulation — It shall be inspected as to each compression whether any 
flash over occurs or not inside the case. 

7.5 Insulation Resistance — The insulation resistance between high tension 
lead wire and the body earth shall be 100 M Q (Min). 

7.6 Heat Resistance — After continuous heating for one hour in an oven 
kept at 70°C ± 1°C the output voltage shall be more than 85 percent of the 
original output voltage and there shall be no physical change. 



IS: 11519 -1985 

8. HUMIDITY CHARACTERISTICS 

8.1 While being subjected to 40°C and 90 to 95 percent relative humidity 
for 100 hours, the output voltage shall be measured at the end of the test. 
There shall be no appreciable change in the output voltage. 

9. MOISTURE PROOF CHARACTERISTICS 

9.1 The piezoelectric ceramic cartridge shall have superior or moisture 
proof characteristics. High quality silicone greeze/oil makes up the air 
gap between the element and eliminates insulation damping and flash over 
inside the case even in high humid conditions. 



