**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 14746 (1999) : Respiratory Protective Devices - Half 
Masks And Quarter Masks [CHD 8: Occupational Safety, Health 
and Chemical Hazards] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14746 : 1999 
Q Reaffirmed 2009 

Indian Standard 

RESPIRATORY PROTECTIVE DEVICES — HALF 
MASKS AND QUARTER MASKS — SPECIFICATION 

ICS 13.340.30 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1999 Price Group 8 



Industrial Safety Sectional Committee, CHD 08 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Industrial 
Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

Half masks and quarter masks are widely used in the environment where there is contamination of toxic or 
hazardous gases in the air. Depending on concentration and nature of the contamination, the half masks or 
quarter masks are used. While formulating this standard considerable assistance has been taken from EN 140: 1 989 
'Specification for half masks and quarter masks for respiratory protective devices', published by European 
Committee for Standardization, Brussels. This standard is generally in line with EN 140:1989. 

The composition of the technical committee responsible for formulating this standard is given at Annex C. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 AUGUST 2004 

TO 

IS Ul 46:1999 RESPIRATORY PROTECTIVE 

DEVICES — HALF MASKS AND QUARTER MASKS — 

SPECIFICATION 

{Page 15, Fig. 11, /we 5 ) — Substitute '90°' /or '900' and M(i9 for '126.9'. 

{Page 15, Fig. 11, lined)— Substitute '90°7or '90^' and '100.0' /or '100.0'. 

( Page 15, Fig. 1 1, line 7 ) — Substitute '90°' for '90^' ant/ '12.07or '12.0'. 

{Page 15, 7^/g. 11, line 8 ) — Substitute '112.0 cm^ = 100%' /or 112,0 cm^ = 
100%'. 



( Page 15, Fig. 11, /we 9 ) — Substitute '39.0 cm^ = W/ifor 39.0 cm^ 



100%'. 



( CHD 8 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 2002 

TO 

IS Ul 46:1999 RESPIRATORY PROTECTIVE 

DEVICES — HALF MASKS AND QUARTER MASKS — 

SPECIFICATION 

( Page 1, clause 3.2, first sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 

'A quarter mask is facepiece which covers the nose and mouth.' 
( CHD 8 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 14746 : 1999 



Indian Standard 

RESPIRATORY PROTECTIVE DEVICES — HALF 
MASKS AND QUARTER MASKS — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes requirements for half masks 
and quarter masks for use as part of respiratory 
protective devices, except escape apparatus and diving 
apparatus. 

Laboratory and practical performance tests are 
included for the assessment of compliance with the 
requirements. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this Indian Standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revisions, and parties to 
agreements based on this Indian Standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the Indian Standards 
indicated below: 



IS No. 
4905 : 1968 

8347 : 1977 

14138 (Part 1) : 1994 



14166 : 19^ 



3 TERMINOLOGY 



Title 

Methods of random 

sampling 

Glossary of terms relating 

to respiratory protective 

devices 

Respiratory protective 

devices; Threads for 

facepieces: Part 1 Standard 

thread connection — 

Specification 

Respiratory protective 
devices — Full face masks 
— Specification 



For the purpose of this standard following definitions 
shall apply. 

3.1 Half Mask 

A half mask is a facepiece, which covers the nose, 
mouth and chin. They are intended to provide adequate 
sealing on the face of the wearer of a respiratory 
protective device against the ambient atmosphere, 
when the skin is dry or moist and when the head is 
moved. 



3.2 Quarter Mask 

A quarter mask is facepieee which covers the nose, 
mouth and chia They are intended to provide adequate 
sealing on the face of the wearer of a respiratory 
protective device against the ambient atmosphere, 
when the skin is dry or moist and when the head is 
moved. 

3.3 In addition to the above, for the purpose of this 
standard, the definitions given in IS 8347 shall also 
apply. 

4 REQUIREMENT 

4.1 Materials 

Exposed parts of half masks and quarter masks, that 
is, those which may be subjected to impact during use 
of the apparatus shall not be made of aluminium, 
magnesium and titanium or alloys containing such 
proportions of these metals as will, on impact, give 
rise to irictional sparks capable of igniting flammable 
gas mixtures. 

4.2 Des^n 

The masks shall be so designed that air enters the 
facepiece and passes directly to the nose and mouth 
area of the facepieee. The exhaled air flows directly to 
the ambient atmosphere, via the exhalation valve(s) 
or by other appropriate means. 

4.3 Cleaning and Disinfecting 

The materials used shall withstand the cleaning and 
disinfecting agents recommended by the manufacturer. 

4.4 Replaceable Components 

Unless integral with the half mask or the quarter mask 
the following components (when fitted) shall be 
replaceable: 

Head harness, connector(s), inhalation and 
exhalation valves. 

Such components shall be visually inspected 
according to A-1. 

4.5 Practical Performance Test 

The complete apparatus shall undergo practical 
performance tests under realistic conditions. These 
general tests serve the purpose of checking the 



1 



IS 14746 : 1999 



equipment for imperfections that cannot be determined 
by the tests described elsewhere in this standard. In 
addition to the tests described in this standard 
details of practical performance tests for breathing 
apparatus are given in the relevant Indian Standard. 
Where a half mask or quarter mask is to be used 
for filtering devices, testing shall be in accordance 
with A-2. 

When practical performance tests show the apparatus 
has imperfections related to wearer's acceptance, fiill 
details of those parts of practical performance tests, 
which revealed these imperfections, shall be provided. 
This will enable during subsequent testing of the masks 
to repeat the tests and assess the results thereof 

4.6 Resistance of Temperature 

After storing the masks at specified temperature in 
accordance with A-3 and then returning to room 
temperature, the facepiece shall not show appreciable 
deformation. 

After the resistance to temperature test the facepiece 
shall be tested for inward leakage and shall meet the 
requirements of 4.7. 

4.7 Inward Leakage of Facepiece 

The facepiece shall fit against the contours of the face 
so that, when tested in accordance with A-4, the inward 
leakage of the test contaminant shall not exceed a 
time average value of 5 percent of the inhaled air for 
any of the required ten test subjects in any of the test 
exercises. 

The mean of all exercises for any one person shall not 
exceed 2 percent. The measured inward leakage 
includes the exhalation valve leakage. 

NOTE — A recommended procedure for measuring the 
contribution from leakage through an exhalation valve 
is given in Annex B. It should not exceed 0.05 percent. 

4.8 Compatibility witli Sliin 

Materials that may come into contact with the wearer's 
skin shall not be known to have potential to cause 
irritation or any adverse effect to health. 

4.9 Flammability 

The material used shall not present a danger for the 
wearer and shall not be of highly flammable nature. 
When tested in accordance with A-5 the facepiece shall 
not continue to bum after removal from the flame. It 
is not required that the facepiece still has to be usable 
after the test. 

4.10 Carbon Dioxide Content of the Inhalation Air 

When tested in accordance with A-6 the carbon dioxide 
content of the inhalation air (dead space) shall not 



exceed an average of 1.0 percent (by volume). 

4.11 Head Harness 

4.11.1 The head harness shall be so designed that the 
facepiece can be donned and removed easily, when 
tested according to A-2. 

4.11.2 The head harness shall be adjustable or 
self-adjusting and shall hold the facepiece flrmly and 
comfortably in position, when tested according 
to A-2. 

4.11.3 Each strap of the head harness shall withstand 
a pull of 50 N applied for 10 seconds in the direction 
of pulling when the facepiece is donned. 

4.12 Facepiece Connector 

When tested according to A- 1 , the masks shall conform 
to the requirements given in 4.12.1, 4.12.2 and 4.12.3. 

4.12.1 The connections between the facepiece and 
the apparatus may be achieved by a permanent or 
special (for example insert) type of connection or by a 
standard thread connection. If a standard thread 
connection is used for example for a single fllter mask 
then the relevant requirements of IS 14138 (Part 1) 
shall be satisfled. 

4.12.2 A facepiece shall not have more than one 
standard thread connection. If any other screw thread 
is used it shall not be possible to connect it to the 
standard thread. If a screw thread is used for a twin 
fllter facepiece it shall not be possible to connect it to 
the standard thread. Half masks and quarter masks shall 
not be equipped with a centre thread connector. 

4.12.3 The connection between the faceblank and the 
connector shall be sufficiently robust to with 
stand axially a tensile force of 50 N when tested in 
accordance with A-7. 

Correct and reliable connection between facepiece and 
other parts of the equipment shall be ensured. 

4.13 Field of Vision 

The fleld of vision shall be acceptable when determined 
so during the practical performance tests. Comparative 
testing of the fleld of vision is carried out in accordance 
with the method described in A-8. 

4.14 Inhalation and Exhalation Valves 

Valves assemblies shall be such that they can be readily 
maintained and correctly replaced. It shall not be 
possible to flt an exhalation valve assembly into the 
inspiratory circuit or an inhalation valve assembly into 
the exhalation circuit, when tested in accordance 
with A- 1. 

4.14.1 Inhalation Value(s) 

4.14.1.1 The facepiece should preferably be provided 



IS 14746 : 1999 



with one or more inhalation valve(s). If a standard 
ttiread connection is used, an inhalation valve shaE be 
incorporated in the facepiece. If the facepiece has to 
be used with filters it shall be provided with an integral 
inhalation valve, if there is no valve in the filter. 

4.14.1.2 Inhalation valve(s) shall fimction correctly 
in all orientations. 

4.14.2 Exhalation value(s) 

4.14.2.1 Exhalation valve(s) shall function correctly 
in all orientations. 

4.14.2.2 The facepiece shall have at least one exha- 
lation valve or appropriate means to aEow the escape 
of exhaled air and, where applicable, any excess air 
delivered by the air supply. 

4.14.2.3 The exhalation valve(s) shall be protected 
against dirt and mechanical damage and shall be 
shrouded or shall include any other device that may 
be necessary to comply with 4.7. 

4.14.2.4 The exhalation valve(s) shall continue to 
operate correctly after a continuous exhalation flow 
of 300 1/min over a period of 30 seconds. Test specimen 
shaU be in the state as received. 

4.14.3 When the exhalation valve housing is attached 
to the faceblank, it shaU withstand axially a tensile 
force of 50 N applied for 10 seconds. Test specimens 
shall be in the state as received. 

4.15 Breathing Resistance 

When tested in accordance with A-9, the breathing 
resistance of the facepiece shaU not exceed 2.0 mbar^ 
for inhalation and 3.0 mbar for exhalation when tested 
with a breathing machine (25 x 2 l/min) or a continuous 
flow of 160 1/min. 

The inhalation resistance shall not exceed 0.5 mbar at 
30 1/min continuous flow and 1.3 mbar at 95 1/min 
continuous flow. 

4.16 De-mountable Parts 

AU de-mountable connections shall be readily 
connected and secured, where possible by hand. Any 
means of sealing used shaU be retained in position 
when the coimection is disconnected during normal 
maintenance. 

5 MARKING 

5.1 AU units of the same model shall be provided 
with a type identifying marking. Sub-assembHes and 
components with considerable bearing on safety 
shaU be marked so that they can be identified. The 
manufacturer shaU be identified by name, trade-mark 
or other means of identification. 



5.2 Where the reliable performance of components 
may be affected by ageing, means of identifying the 
date (at least the year) of manufacture shaU be marked. 
For parts, which cannot be marked, the relevant 
information shaU be included in the instructions for 
use. 

5.3 The marking shall be as clearly visible and as 
durable as possible. 

5.4 BIS Certification Marking 

The half masks and quarter masks may also be marked 
with the Standard Mark. 

5.4.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the Hcence for use 
of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained fiom the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 

6 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 

6.1 On delivery instmctions for use shaU accompany 
every facepiece. 

6.2 Instructions for use shall be in one or more 
languages acceptable to the country of appHcation. 

63 The instructions for use for the equipment shaU 
contain aU information necessary for trained and 
quaHfied persons on: 

— appHcation/limitation; 

— checks prior to use; 

— donning, fitting; 

— use; 

— maintenance (preferably separately printed 
instructions); and 

— storage. 

6.4 The instructions shaU be unambiguous. If helpful, 
illustrations, part number, marking, etc, shall be added. 

6.5 Warning shaU be given against problems likely to 
the encountered, for example: 

— fit of facepiece (check prior to use); 

— it is unlikely that the requirements for leakage 
wiU be achieved if facial hair passes under the 
face seal; 

— hazards of oxygen and oxygen-enriched air; 

— air quality; and 

— use of equipment in explosive atmosphere. 



lbar=105N/m =100kPa. 



IS 14746 : 1999 



7 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 

7.1 Lot 

In a single consignment, all the half masks and quarter 
masks assembled under uniform conditions of 
manufacture on the same day, shall constitute a lot 

7.1.1 Each lot shall be tested separately for ascertaining 
the conformity of the lot to the requirements of the 
specification. The number of iace masks to be selected 
fiom the lot shall depend upon the size of the lot and 
shall be in accordance with Table 1. 

7.1.2 The masks shall be selected at random from the 
lot. For this purpose, reference may be made to 
IS 4905. 





Table 1 Number of Samples to be Tested 




from a 


Lot 




(Clause 


7.1.1) 


SI No. No. of Face Masks 


No. of Face Masks to be 




in the Lot 


Selected in a Sample 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


i) 


Up to 50 


8 


«) 


51 to 150 


13 


iii) 


151 and above 


20 



7.2 Number of Tests 

7.2.1 Each of the face masks selected from the lot 
according to col 2 of Table 1 shall be examined 
for visual inspection (4.4, 4.12 and 4.14) and field of 
vision (4.13). 

7.2.1.1 The lot shall be considered to have satisfied 
the above requirements if none of the masks in the 
sample fails. Otherwise, the lot shall be rejected. 

7.2.2 The sample having been found satisfactory as 
per 6.2.1 shall be further tested for the requirements 
ofcarbone dioxide content (4.10), breathing resistance 
(4.15), practical performance test (4.5), and cleaning 
and disinfection (4.3) in this sequence. 

7.2.2.1 The lot shall be considered to have satisfied 
the above requirements if there is no failure in the 
sample. Otherwise, the lot shall be rejected. 

7.2.3 Approximately half the number of masks, out 
of the sample already been found satisfactory as 
per 6.2.2, shall be conditioned as per 4.6 and shall be 
tested for inward leakage of facepiece (4.7), 
fiammability (4.9), and inhalation and exhalation 
valve (4.14). 

7.2.3.1 The other half of the sample shall be tested 
for the requirements of facepiece (4.7), fiammability 
(4.9), head harness tests (4.11.3 and 4.11.4) facepiece 

connector (4.12), exhalation valves (4.14.2), 



Table 2 Summary of Test 

(Clause 7.3) 



SI 

No. 


No. of 
Samples 


Test Criteria 


Pre-conditioning 

(Yes/No) 


Clause 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


i) 


All 


Visual inspection 


No 


4.4/4.12 
4.14/A-l 


ii) 


5 


Cleaning and disinfection 
For total inward leakage tests 


As recommended 
By manufacturer 


4.3/ 
A-l/A-4 


iii) 


3 


Head harness tests pull test 


No 


4.11.3 


iv) 


3 


Facepiece connector pull test 


No 


4.12.2/A-7 


V) 


3 


Exhalation valve housing pull test 


No 


4.14.3 


vi) 


5 


Facepieces 

Exhalation valves 

Performance tests 

Continuous flow optional leakage test 


No 

2 conditioned 

3 as received then use 
for leakage test 


4.14.2/ 
4.14.2.4/ 
Annex B 


vii) 


3 


Fiammability 


No 


4.9/A-5 


viii) 


1 


Carbon dioxide content 


No 


4.10/A-6 


ix) 


3 


Breathing resistance 


No 


4.15/A-9 


X) 


5 


Inward leakage 


2 conditioned '' 

3 as received 


4.7/A-4 


xi) 


2 


Practical performance test 


No 


4.5/4.11.1 

4.11.2/4.13/ 

A-2 




NOTE — Most samples are used for more than one test. 








'' Conditioning/resistance to temperature (see 4.6 and A-3). 







IS 14746 : 1999 



performance tests (4.14.2.4) and exhalation valves 
housing (4.14.3). 

7.2.3.2 The lot shall be considered as conforming to 
the requirements of this specification if all the face 



masks pass the requirements specified in 7.2.3. 
Otherwise the lot shall be rejected. 

7.3 A summary of tests applicable for half masks and 
quarter masks is given in Table 2. 



ANNEX A 

(Clauses 4.4,4.5,4.6,4.1,4.9,4.10,4.11.1,4.12, 
4.12.3, 4.13, 4.14 a«c/ 4.15) 

METHODS OF TESTS FOR HALF MASKS AND QUARTER MASKS 



A-1 VISUAL INSPECTION 

The visual inspection is carried out, where appropriate, 
by the manufacturer prior to laboratory or practical 
performance tests. 

A-2 PRACTICAL PERFORMANCE TEST 

All tests shall be carried out by two test subjects at 
ambient temperature and the test temperature and 
humidity shall be recorded. For the test, persons shall 
be selected who are familiar with using such or similar 
equipment. 

During the tests, facepiece shall be subjectively 
assessed by the wearer and after the test, comments 
on the following shall be recorded: 

a) Harness comfort; 

b) Security of fastenings and couplings; 

c) Accessibility of controls (if fitted); 

d) Clarity of vision on the visor of the facepiece 
(if fitted); 

e) Any other comments reported by the wearer 
on request; and 

f) Field of vision (to be determined with the 
component to be used directly on the facepiece). 

A-2.1 Walking Test 

The subjects wearing normal working clothes and 
wearing the facepiece fitted with a filter simulator 
(Fig. 3) shall walk at a regular rate of 6 km/h on a 
level course. The test shall be continuous, without 
removal of the facepiece, for a period of 10 min. 

A-2.2 Work Simulation Test 

a) Facepieces with standard thread connection 
The facepiece shall be fitted with a filter 
simulator (Fig. 3). 

b) Facepieces with special connections 

The facepiece shall be fitted with the filters 
supphed by the manufacturer. 



c) Test procedure 

Each combination shall be tested under 
conditions which can be expected during 
normal use. During this test the following 
activities shall be carried out in simulation of 
the practical use of the apparatus. The test shall 
be completed within a total working time of 20 
min. 

The sequence of activities shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier. The individual activities 
shall be arranged so that sufficient time is left for the 
comments prescribed. 

a) Walking on the level with headroom of 1.1 to 
1.5 m for 5 min. 

b) Crawling on the level with headroom of less 
than 0.75 m for 5 min. 

c) Filling a small basket {see Fig. 1 , approximately 
volume = 81) with 'rubber chippings' or other 
suitable material from a hopper which stands 
1.5 m high and has an opening at the bottom 

to allow the contents to be shovelled out and 
rubber chippings shall be returned. 

The subject shall stoop or kneel as he wishes and fill 
the basket with rubber chippings. He shall then lift 
the basket and empty the contents back into the hopper. 
This shall be repeated IS to 20 times in 10 min. 

A-3 RESISTANCE TO TEMPERATURE 

Two facepieces shall be treated in the state as received. 
The facepiece shall be exposed during successive tests: 

a) for 24 hours to a dry atmosphere of 70 ± 3 °C; and 

b) for 24 hours to a temperature of -30 ± 3°C. 

A-4 INWARD LEAKAGE OF FACEPIECE 

The laboratory tests shall indicate that the facepiece 
can be used by the wearer to protect with high pro- 
bability against the potential hazard to be expected. 
The sodium chloride and sulphur hexafluride methods 
are equally acceptable options. The inward leakage 
shall be tested with 5 facepieces, two of them already 
preconditioned in accordance with A-3. 



IS 14746:1999 



A4.1 General Test Procedure 

A-4.1.1 Inward Leakage 

Prior to the test there shall be an examination that, the 
facepiece is in good working condition and that it can 
be used without hazard. For the test, persons shall be 
selected who are familiar with using such or similar 
equipment. 

A panel often clean-shaven persons (with beard or 
sidebums shall be selected covering the spectmm of 
facial characteristics of typical users (excluding 
significant abnormalities). It is to be expected that 
exceptionally some persons cannot be satisfactorily 
fitted with a facepiece. Such exceptional subjects shall 
not be used for testing facepieces. In the test report 
the faces of the ten test persons shall be described 
(for information only) by the four following facial 
dimensions (in mm) illustrated in Fig. 2. 

If more than one size of facepiece is manufactured the 



test subjects shall be supplied with the appropriate size. 

A-4.L2 Apparatus 

A-4.1.2.I Test atmosphere 

The test atmosphere shall preferably enter the top of 
the hood/chamber through a flow distributor and be 
directed downwards over the head of the test subject 
at a minimum velocity of 0.12 m/s. The concentration 
of the test agent inside the effective working volume 
shall be checked to be homogeneous. The velocity, 
should be measured close to the subject's head. 

The design of the hood/chamber shall be such that the 
test subject wearing the facepiece under test can be 
supplied with breathable air (free of test atmosphere). 

A-4.U.2 Treadmill 

A level treadmill is required capable of working at 6 
km/h. 





FIG. 1 BASKET AND HOPPER RUBBER CHIPPINGS 




I 






kogthoffKe 
(nMionHnemon) 



width of bee 
(bizygomotic 
diomettr) 



depth of bee 



width of 
mouth 



HG. 2 FACIAL DIMENSIONS 

6 



IS 14746 : 1999 



i. 



>'V%X%V, 








Jl 



*SeeEN 148-1 : 1987 

AH dimensions in millimetres. 

FIG. 3 FILTER SIMULATOR FOR STANDARD THREAD 
FILTERS/HALF MASKS OR QUARTER MASKS 

A-4. 1.2.3 Filter simulator 

If the facepiece is to be used with a filter having a 
standard thread, a device is required to simulate the 
maximum weight and resistance of filters permitted 
for that type of facepiece (Fig. 3). This simulator shall 
be connected to a clean air supply by an ultralight- 
weight flexible hose. If the facepiece uses a special 
connection, the clean air supply shall be attached to 
the filter or equipment normally used with the 
facepiece. It is important that the attachment of the 
clean air hose to the facepiece does not affect the fit of 
the facepiece and if necessary the hose shall be 
supported. 

The filter simulator shall not weigh more than 300 g 
and the weight shall be equally distributed along the 
length. Pressure drop shall be 1 mbar at 95 1/min. 

A-4. 1.3 Procedure 

The test subjects shall be asked to read the manufac- 
turers's fitting instruction, and if necessary shown by 
the test supervisor how to fit the facepiece correctly, 
in accordance with the fitting instructions. 

The test subjects shall be informed that if they wish to 
adjust the facepiece during the test they may do so. 
However if this is done, the relevant section of the test 
shall be repeated having allowed the system to settle. 
The test subjects shall have no indication of the results 
as the test proceeds. 

After fitting the facepiece each test subject shall be 
asked "Does the mask fit?" If the answer is "Yes", 
continue the test. If the answer is "NO", take the test 
subject off the panel, report the fact and replace the 
person by another test subject. 

The test sequence shall be as follows: 

a) Ensure the test atmosphere is OFF. 



b) Place that the test subj ect in the hood/chamber. 
Connect up the facepiece sampling probe. Have 
the test subject walk at 6 km/h for 2 min. 
Measure the test agent concenttation inside the 
facepiece to establish the background level. 

c) Obtain a stable reading. 

d) Turn the test atmosphere ON. 

e) The subject shall continue to walk for a further 
2 min or until the test atmosphere has stabilized. 

f) While still walking the subject shall perform 

the following exercises: 

i) Walking for 2 min without head 

movement or taking, 
ii) Turing head from side to side 

(approximately 15 times), as if inspecting 

the wall of a tunnel for 2 min. 
iii) Moving the head up and down 

(approximately 15 times), as if inspecting 

the roof and floor for 2 min. 
iv) Reciting the alphabet or an agreed text 

out load as it communicating with a 

colleague for 2 min. 
v) Walking for 2 min without head 

movement or talking, 
vi) Turn off the test atmosphere and when 

the test agent has cleared from the 

chamber remove the subject. 

A-4.1.4 Results 

Record the following as test results: 

a) chamber concenttation; and 

b) the leakage over each exercise period. 

After each test the facepiece shall be cleaned, 
disinfected and dried before being used for its second 
inward leakage test an another test subject. 

A-4.2 Sulphur Hexafluoride (SFs) Method 

A-4.2.1 Principle 

The subject wearing the apparatus under test shall walk 
on a tteadmill over which is a hood/chamber. Through 
this hood/chamber flows a constant concentration of 

The air inside the facepiece is sampled and analyzed. 
The sample is exttacted by punching a hole in the face 
blank and inserting a probe through which the sample 
is drawn. 

A-4.2.2 Apparatus (Fig. 4) 

A-4.2.2.1 Test agent 

This method employs SFg as a test gas. The subject 
wearing the facepiece under test stands with his head 
surrounded by the SFg test atmosphere. Accurate 



IS 14746 : 1999 



determinations of leakage shall be possible within the 
range from 0.01 percent to approximately 20 percent 
dependent on the test challenge atmosphere. It is 
recommended to use a test atmosphere between 0.1 
and 1 percent by volume. 

A-4.2.2.2 Detection 

The test atmosphere shall be analysed fox SFe prefe- 
rably continuously by means of a suitable analyser (for 
example, based on thermal conductivity or infrared 
spectroscopy). 

The test atmosphere sampling probe shall not be 
positioned next to the exhalation valve. The SFg 
concentration inside the facepiece shall be analyzed 
and recorded by an electron capture detector (ECD) 
or IR-system. This concentration, measured as 
near as possible to the mouth of the test subject, 
(approximately 5 mm, in the centre of the facepiece). 



is a measure of the inward leakage. 

The test shall be performed at ambient temperature 
and humidity. 

A-4.2.3 Sampling 

In order to prepare the facepiece for the test the 
faceblank has to be perforated. A thin tube, as short 
as possible, leading into the cavity shall be connected 
in a leak-tight manner to the analyzing instrument. The 
sampling rate should be constant and in the range 
between 0.3 and 1.5 1/min. 

A-4.2.4 Calculation of the Leakage 

The leakage P shall be calculated from measurements 
made over the last 100s of each of the exercise periods 
to avoid carry over of results from one exercise to the 
other. 




1 . Treadmill 

2. Test hood/chamber 

3. Row distributor 

4. Suspension 

5. Test agent supply hose 

6. Mixing point air/SF<j 

7. Row meter for air with superposed 
control device 

8. Row meter for SF,; ( 1 00% by volume) 
with superposed control valve 



9. 


Test atmosphere sampling probe 


10. 


Measuring instrument for test agent 


11. 


Sampling tube for the inhaled 




gas concentration 


12. 


Measuring instrument for inhaled 




gas concentration 


13. 


Recorder 


14. 


Filter simulator 


15. 


Breathable air 



FIG. 4 SCHEME OF THE SFt 



TEST RIG FOR INWARD LEAKAGE 



IS 14746 : 1999 



Pipenem)' 



X 100 



where 

C\ challenge concentration, and 

C2 measured mean concentration. 

Measurement of Cj is preferably made using an 
integrating recorder. 

A-4.3 Sodium Chloride (NaCl) Method 

A-4.3.1 Principle 

The subject wearing the facepiece under test walks on 
a treadmill over which is hood/chamber. Through this 
hood/chamber flows a constant concentration of NaCl 
aerosol. The air inside the facepiece is sampled and 
analyzed during the inhalation phase of the respiratory 
cycle to determine the NaCl content. The sample is 
extracted by punching a hole in the faceblank and 
inserting a probe through which the sample is drawn. 
The pressure variation inside the facepiece is used to 
actuate a change-over valve so that inhaled air only is 
sampled. A second probe is inserted for this purpose. 

A-4.3.2 Apparatus 

A-4.3. 2.1 Aerosol generator 

The NaCl aerosol shall be generated from a 2 percent 
solution of reagent grade NaCl in distilled water. A 
single large Collision atomizer of the type described 
shall be used (Fig. 5). This requires an air flow rate of 
100 1/min at a pressure of 7 bar. The atomizer and its 
housing shall be fitted into a duct through which a 
constant flow of air is maintained. It may be necessary 
to heat or dehumidity the air in order to obtain complete 
drying of the aerosol particles. 

A-4.3.2. 2 Test agent 

The mean NaCl concentration within the hood/ 
chamber shall be (8 ± 4) mg/m^ and the variation 
throughout the effective working volume shall be not 
more than 10 percent The particle size distribution 
shall be 0.02 |im to 2 |im equivalent aerodynamic 
diameter with a mass median diameter of 0.6 |im. 

A-4.3.2. 3 Flame photometer 

A flame photometer shall be used measure the 
concentration of NaCl inside the facepiece. Essential 
performance characteristics for a suitable instrument 
are: 

a) It should be a flame photometer specifically 
designed for the direct analysis of NaCl aerosol. 

b) It should be capable of measuring concen- 
trations of NaCl aerosol between 15 mg/m^ and 

5 mg/m"'. 



c) The total aerosol sample required by the 
photometer should not be greater than 1 5 1/min. 

d) The response time of the photometer, excluding 
the sampling system, should not be greater than 
500 ms. 

e) It is necessary to reduce the response to other 
elements, in particular carbon, the concentration 
of which will vary during the breathing cycle. 
This will be achieved by ensuring that the band 
pass width of the interference filter is no greater 
than 3 nm and that all necessary side-band 
filters are included. 

A-4.3. 2. 4 Sample selector 

A system is required which will switch the sample to 
the photometer only during the inhalation phase of the 
respiratory cycle. During the exhalation phase clean 
air shall be fed to the photometer. The essential 
elements of such a system are: 

a) an electrically operated valve with a response 
time of the order of 100 ms. The valve should 
have the minimum possible dead space 
compatible with straight-through, unrestricted 
flow when open; 

b) a pressure sensor which is capable of detecting 
a minimum pressure change of approximately 
0.05 mbar and which can be connected to a 
probe inserted in the mask cavity. The sensor 
shall have an adjustable threshold and be 
capable of differential signalling when the 
threshold is crossed in either direction. The 
sensor shall work reliably when subjected to 
the accelerations produced by the head 
movements of the subject; 

c) an interfacing system to actuate the valve in 
response to a signal from the pressure sensor; 
and 

d) a timing device to record the proportion of the 
total respiratory cycle during which sampling 
took place. 

A-4.3.2. 5 Sampling probe 

The probe consists of a length of 1 mm bore hypo- 
dermic tube fitted securely in an airtight manner to 
the facepiece as near as possible to the centre line of 
the mask. A plastic ball of approximately 20 mm 
diameter with 8 holes each of 1.5 mm diameter and 
spaced equidistant around the circumference of the ball 
is fitted onto the hypodermic tube. The probe is 
adjusted so that the ball just touches the wearer's lips. 

A-4.3. 2. 6 Samplepump 

If no pump is incorporated into the photometer an 
adjustable flow pump is used to withdraw an air sample 



IS 14746 : 1999 

from the facepiece under test This pump is so adjusted sample probe. Dependent on the type of photometer 
as to withdraw a constant flow of 1 1/min from the it may be necessary to dilute the sample with clean air. 



2-§t8*'^ <fMS.7-( y| 5 




TUBE. SILVER; 
SOLDERED 
0.018 THICK 






J 






1.6 »r 

*5^ 



a 



(fH3 D RILL 



020.6 



Item Lilt 



Item 


Name 


No. off 


- 


Assembly of 
atomizer 


- 


1 


Nozzle 




2 


F^edtube 
salt solution 




3 


Bottle 
polythene 




4 


Sieve 




5 


Screw cap 
for bottle 




6 


Washer 

25 X 13 X 3.2 




7 


Washer 
9.5x4,8x2.4 




8 


'O'leal 




9 


Air tube 
major ;a'l3 
minor j^6.i 


At 
requited 



U-CUTTO 
THREAD 
DEPTH 



V g ' ^^F 



Vf ^ 

mi 



\ 




•turn 




^.8 DRILL 




DRILL 



0Q.7A PRIH, 



ENLARGED VIEW A 




OAfUCD 13 
TO ACGGMDO/ire 

nn TUBE 

AS SHOWN 



ASSEMBLY OF ATOMIZER 



12 HOL ES. f( 4,e AT 3tf* 



NOTE — All burrs and sharp edges should be removed. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

FIG. 5 ASSEMBLY OF ATOMIZER 



10 



IS 14746 : 1999 



A-4. 3. 2.1 Sampling of hood/chamber concentration where 



The hood/chamber (see Fig. 6) aerosol concentration 
is monitored during the tests using a separate sampling 
system, to avoid contamination of the facepiece 
sampling lines. It is preferable to use a separate flame 
photometer for this purpose. If a second photometer 
is not available, sampling of the hood/chamber concen- 
tration using a separate sampling system and the same 
photometer may be made. However, time will then 
be required to allow the photometer to return to clean 
background. 

A-4. 3.2. 8 Pressure detection probe 

A second probe is fitted near to the sample probe and 
is connected to the pressure sensor. 

A-4. 3. 3 Calculation 

The leakage P shall be calculated from measurements 
made over the last 100 seconds of each of the exercise 
period to avoid carry over of results from one exercise 
to the other: 



P (percent) = 



'.n + 'ex 



xlOO 



C, 
Ci 

'in 



= challenge concentration 

= measured mean concentration 

= total duration of inhalation 

= total duration of exhalation 



Measurement of C2 is preferably made using an 
integrating recorder. 

A-5 FLAMMABIUTY 

The brand new facepiece shall be tested for flamma- 
bility with the test rig described in Annex E of IS 14166 
for M lace masks but shall be adjusted according to 
the following instructions: 

For the test the facepiece shall be put on the metallic 
dummy head which shall be motorized such that it 
can describe a horizontal circle with variable control 
speed. The head shall pass over a Bunsen propane 
burner whose position can be adjusted. By means 
of suitable gauges, the height of the flame shall be 
set to 40 mm and the distance between the top of 
the burner and the lowest part of the facepiece 
passing through the flame shall be set to 20 mm. 
The head shall be set in motion and the effect of 
passing the facepiece once through the flame at (6 
± 0.5) cm/s shall be noted. 



12. 



'X_ "=ii ^ 



o-Jr-^ 



«o-» 



113 





1. 


Atomizer 


J 


Pump 


3. 


Change-over valve 


4. 


Filter 


5. 


Hood/chamber 


6. 


Hood/chamber sample 


7. 


Facepiece sample 



8. Martometer 

9. Photometer 

10. Reference simulator tresh air 

11. Treadmill 

12. Ducting and baffle 

13. Additional air 

14. Pulsed sampling interface 



FIG. 6 APPARATUS USED IN THE DETERMINATION OF INWARD LEAKAGE USING SODIUM CHLORIDE 



11 



IS 14746 : 1999 



The temperature of the flame at a height of 20 mm 
above the burner tip shall be 800 ± 50°C. The 
temperature shall be checked with a suitable measuring 
instrument. 

When components such as valve(s) are arranged on 
other parts of the faceblank the test shall be repeated 
with other samples of the facepiece in the appropriate 
position. 

A-6 CARBON DIOXIDE CONTENT OF THE 
INHALATION AIR 

The apparatus consists essentially of breathing machine 
with solenoid valves controlled by the breathing 
machine, a cotmector, a CO2 flowmeter and CO2 
analyzer. 

The apparatus subjects the facepiece to a respiration 
cycle by the breathing machine. For this test the 
facepiece shall be fitted securely in a leak-tight manner 
but without deformation on a dummy head (type 
SheflBeld)f5eeFig. 7). 

Air shall be supplied to it fix)m a breathing machine 
adjusted to 25 strokes/min and 2.0 l/stroke and the 
exhaled air shall have a carbon dioxide content of 5 
percent by volume. 



A typical test arrangement is shown in Fig. 8. 

To prevent a CO2 build-up due to design of the test 
equipment a CO2 absorber shall be used in the 
inhalation branch between solenoid valve and 
breathing machine. The CO2 is fed into the breathing 
machine via a control valve, a flowmeter, a compen- 
sating bag and two non-return valves. 

Immediately before the solenoid valve a small quantity 
of exhaled air is continuously withdrawn through a 
sampling line and then fed into the exhaled air via a 
CO2 analyzer. To measure the CO2 content of the 
inhaled air, 5 percent of the stroke volume of the 
inhalation phase of the breathing machine is drawn 
off at the marked place by an auxiliary lung and fed 
to a CO2 analyzer. The total dead space of the gas 
path (excluding the breathing machine) of the test 
installation should not exceed 2 000 ml. 

The carbon dioxide content of the inhaled air shall be 
measured and recorded continuously. This test shall 
be performed until a constant carbon dioxide content 
in this inhalation air is achieved. 

A-7 FACEPIECE CONNECTOR 

The test time shall be 10 seconds. The facepiece shall 



U5 



V 

#l*i/ 

^iW 



imi 



42 




INSERT FOR 

MEASUREMENT 

OFBREATHINO 

VIEW X ''^'^'''A'^CE 



■'' mm' 

SECTION A A 



ir 



^ - 



.Ci 



6x1 




28x0.5 






.*?»?. 



a. 



«Q 



2>0 



«a — INHALATION 
■*— EXHALATION 

CO2 MEASURING 
'(INHALATION) 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

FIG 7 DUMMY HEAD (SHEFFIELD HEAD) FOR CARBON DIOXIDE CONTENT TEST OF THE 
INHALATION AIR (DEAD SPACE) FOR A PULL FACE MASK 



12 



IS 14746 : 1999 




1 . Breathing machine 

2. Auxiliary lung 

3. Non-return valve 

4. Flow meter 

5. Compensator 



6. Carbon dioxide analyzer 

7. Solenoid valves 

8. Dummy head 

9. Sampling tube for inhalation air (see Pig. 9) 
10. Carbon dioxide absorber 



FIG. 8 SCHEME OF TEST RIG FCR CARBON DIOXIDE CONTENT OF THE INHALATION AIR 



be supported on a dummy head, which can be adjusted 
so that the load can be applied axiaUy to the connection 
{see Fig. 9). Additionally, a system of restraining straps 
or bands shall be fitted over the faceblank around the 
connection, so that the load is applied as directly as 
possible to the fitting of the connection in the faceblank 




FIG. 9 TEST ARRANGEMENT PCR TENSILE FORCE 



and the restraining force is not applied wholly to the 
head harness. 

A-8 FIELD OF VISION 

The field of vision shall be measured with an 
'Apertometer' according to StoU {see Fig. 10). A 
diagram {see Fig. 1 1) shall be used for the evaluation. 

Procedure to measure the field of vision of a facepiece: 

a) Carefully fit the facepiece to the dummy head 
and, with both eyes lit, adjust the facepiece until 
the outline is symmertrical on the spherical 
shell. Adjust the tension of the straps to obtain 
a reasonable, secure fit. 

b) Map the positions of the field of vision of each 
eye individually on to the printed diagram, 
using the grid lines as a guide. 

c) Carefully measure the areas of the total field of 
vision and the overlapped field of vision with 



13 



IS 14746 : 1999 



^ .-14.5 





12.5 



TRANSFER THE 
NATURAL FIELD 
OF VISION WITH 
THE NATURAL 
OVERLAPPED 
FIELD OF 
VISION TO THE 
DIAGRAM 




R40 





SECTION AA 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 10 APERTOMETER 



14 



IS 14746 : 1999 




•W ,pw? 



too li t» 



... natural field of vision with 
natural overlapped field of vision. 

The areas enclosed by circular lines of the diagram are proportional to the corresponding areas marked on the spherical shell of the 
apertometer. 

Semi-circular surface represented inside of the 900 circle. = 126,9 cm^ 

Natural field of vision inside of the 90^ circle (78,8%).... = 100,0 cm^ 

Natural field of vision outside of the 90^ circle .= 12,0 cm^ 

Natural field of vision totally = 1 12,0 cm^ n 100% 

Natural field of vision totally .= 39,0 cm' LI 100% 

Shape of lenses : facepiece model: 

(dimensions) 



Where measurements of the field of vision are taken, the effective field of vision as observed by the apertometer shall be transferred to the 
diagram. Only the effective field of vision within the natural field of vision respectively the effective overlapped field of vision shall be 
planimetered and noted in cm^. 

Planimetered area of effective field of vision (totally) cm^. 

Planimetered area of effective overlapped field of vision cm^. 

Effective field of vision (totally) %. 

Effective overlapped field of vision %. 

FIG. 11 DIAGRAM OF THE APERTOMETER 



15 



IS 14746 : 1999 



a planimeter. The field of vision is the 
innermost line at any point of either the field 
of vision of the facepiece, or the natural field 
of vision of men according to StoU as shown 
on the printed diagram. 

Express the results as a percentage of the area of the 
natural field of vision of men according to Stoll 
(already marked on the diagram). 



A-9 BREATHING RESISTANCE 

The facepiece shall be fitted securely in a leak-tight 
manner but without deformation on a dummy head. 
The resistance shall be measured at the opening for 
the mouth of the dummy head using the adapter shown 
in Fig. 7 and a breathing machine adjusted to 25 
strokes/min and 2.0 1/stroke or a continuous flow of 
160 1/min. A resistance value shall be corrected to 
27°C and 1 bar absolute. 



ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.7 ) 

METHOD OF TEST FOR EXHALATION VALVE LEAKAGE 
(This Annex is for information only) 



B-1 APPARATUS 

This consists mainly of: 



a) 



b) 



c) 
d) 
e) 

f) 



a small volume (volume :1 to 1.21) leak tight 

box attached to a tube with opening (s) between 

the box and tube in which the valve assemblies 

are mounted in suitable adaptors of low dead 

space {see Fig. 12). There are baffle plates in 

the box to promote smooth test gas flow 

(100 1/min continuous flow); 

a breathing machine delivering sinusoidal air 

flows corresponding to 20 strokes/min and 

1.5 1/stroke; 

a supply of CO2; 

a purifier containing absorbent for CO2; 

a unit to saturate the air with water vapour at 

37°C; and 

an instrument capable of measuring test gas 

concentrations. 



B-2 PROCEDURE 

All the exhalation valve assemblies attached to the 



facepiece are tested. The test is performed at ambient 
temperature and relative humidity. The valve assem- 
blies under test are fitted into the box with a suitable, 
adaptor in a vertical position. The components 
are arranged according to whether a single or twin 
cylinder breathing machine is to be used {see Fig. 13 
and 14). 

The inlet valve is adjusted so that the back pressure of 
the valve(s) is 1 to 1.5 mbar at 30 1/min continuous 
flow. The breathing machine is set at 1.5 1/stroke, 
20 strokes/min. A flow of test gas is maintained 
through the box. Samples ofthe air from before and 
after the valve assemblies are continuously analyzed 
for test gas concentrations. 

The test is run for a sufficient time to obtain a steady 
reading ofthe test gas concentration in the inspiratory 
air stream. 

The difference in the test gas concentrations between 
the two samples is a measure ofthe total valve leakage. 
The test shall be carried out using carbon dioxide. 



16 



IS 14746 : 1999 




■•-5 



-^6 



1. Test gas in 

2. Baffle plates 

3. Blanking plate 

4. Valve under test 



5. Test gas out 

6. To breathing machine 

7. Pressure measurement ports 

8. Saturated gas in 



FIG. 12 SCHEME OF EXHALATION VALVE LEAKAGE TEST BOX 



1_ 



B 



11 



.10 



t 




1. Test gas in 

2. Valve under test 

3. Test gas out 

4. Breathing machine valves 

5. Breathing machine 

6. Saturator 



7. Purifier 

8. Reference gas sample 

9. Purifier 

10. Laboratory air in 

11. Adjustable non-return valve 

12. Test gas sample 



The difference between concentrations of samples taken at points 8 and 12 is a measure of the valve leakage. 

FIG. 13 SCHEME OF TEST RIG FOR VALVE LEAKAGE USING A SINGLE CYLINDER MACHINE 



17 



IS 14746 : 1999 




7*ty- 




O 



2 




r— -i „„ 
I — ^ 






O 



1 



1. Test gas in 

2. Valve under test 

3. Test gas out 

4. Purifier 

5. Reference gas sample 

6. Purifier 



7. Laboratory air in through adjustable non-return valve 

8. Saturator 

9. Twin cylinder breathing machine 

10. Laboratory air in 

1 1 . Test gas sample 

12. Breathing machine valves 



The difference between concentrations of the samples taken at points 5 and 1 1 is a measure of the valve leakage. 

FIG. 14 SCHEME OF TEST RIG FOR VALVE LEAKAGE USING A TWING CYLINDER BREATHING MACHINE 



18 



IS 14746 : 1999 



Chairman 
SHRI K. C. GUPTA 

Members 



SHRI PREM BAWEJA 

SHRI B. VIJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 

DR A. K. BORAL 

SHRI R. SRMIVASAN (Alternate) 

DR D. R. CHAWLA 

SHRI M. K. BANERJEE (Alternate) 

DIRECTOR (MINES SAFETY) 

SHRI A. K. RUDRA (Alternate) 

SHRI V. K. GOEL 

SHRI M. L. AHUJA (Alternate) 

SHRI J. P. GOENKA 

SHRI N. DUTTA (Alternate) 

SHRI M. KANT 

SHRI KIRIT MARU (Alternate) 



ANNEX C 

( Foreword ) 

COMMrriEE COMPOSmON 

Indusbial Safety Sectional Committee, CHD 08 

Representing 
National Safety Council, Mumbai 

Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 

Department of Industrial Development, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Central Boiler Board, New Delhi 

Mining, Geological and Metallurgical Institute of India, Calcutta 

Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 



SHRI SURENDRA KUMAR 

SHRI R. PARTHASARATHY (Alternate) 



DR J. MAHAPATRA 
SHRI M. K. MALHOTRA 



SHRI H. N. MIRASHI 

DR H. MUKHERJEE 

SHRI C. M. SHARMA (Alternate) 

SHRI R. N. MUKHERIEE 

SHRI A. BANERJEE (Alternate) 

SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE 

SHRI A. K. GHOSH (Alternate) 

SHRI R. K. PODDAR 

SHRI BHAGWATI PRASAD 

SHRI SATISH CHANDER (Alternate) 

SHRI P. S. PRUTHI 

SHRI SURESH KAPOOR (Alternate) 

SHRI P. RAJENDRAN 

SHRI H. S. RAW AT (Alternate) 

SHRI A. RAMAMURTHY 

SHRI K. RAVICHANDRAN 

SHRI M. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 



Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, Calcutta 

Standing Committee on Safety for Steel Industry, SAIL, Ranchi 

Directorate General Factory Advice Services and Labour Institutes, 
Mumbai 

Factory Inspectorate, Govt of Maharashtra, Mumbai 

Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur 

Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd (ECC Construction Group), Chennai 
Employees State Insurance Corporation, Calcutta 

Indian Pesticides Association, New Delhi 

Directorate General Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 

Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (Oil Industries Safety 
Directorate), New Delhi 

(Continued on page 20) 



19 



IS 14746 : 1999 

(Continued from Page 19) 

Members 

SHRI A. J. REGO 

SHRI R. P. BHANUSHALI (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 

DR S. SADULLA 

SHRI G. SWAMINATHAN (Alternate) 

SHRI M. R. SAMPATH 

SHRI O. N. DAGA (Alternate) 

SHRI P. N. SANKARAN 

SHRI V. K. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 

SHRI G. P. YADAV 

SHRI N. JAIPAL (Alternate) 

DR R. K SINGH, 
Director (Chem) 



Representing 
National Safety Council, Mumbai 
Confederation of Indian Industries, New Delhi 
Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 

Indian Cotton Mills Federation, Mumbai 

Indian Space Research Organization, Shriharikota 

National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 

Director General BIS (Ex-officio Member ) 



Convener 



SHRI R. N. MUKHERJEE 



Member-Secretary 

SHRI P. MUKHOPADHYAY 

Additional Director (Chem), BIS 

Panel for Respiratory Protective Equipment, CHD 08:01/P1 



Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 



Members 



SHRI VIVEK BHARGAVA 

SHRI VIKAS BHARGAVA (Alternate) 

SHRI S. CHATTOPADHYAY 

SHRI K. K. DUTTA (Alternate) 

SHRI S. K. DANGWAL 

SHRI M. H. FULEKAR (Alternate) 

DIRECTOR (MINES SAFETY) 

SHRI A. K. RUDRA (Alternate) 

SHRI A. N. INDURKAR 

SHRI PRATAP NAIR (Alternate) 

SHRI S. K MUKHERJEE 

SHRI B. R. MEHTA (Alternate) 

SHRI C PERREIRA 

SHRI DON RISHBERT (Alternate) 

SHRI S. SANYAL 

SHRI J. N. SHARMA 



Industrial Medical Engineers, New Delhi 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 

Central Labour Institute, Mumbai 

Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Mines Safety Appliances, Calcutta 

Institute of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 

Joseph Leslie Drager Mfg & Co, Mumbai 

Coal India Ltd, Calcutta 

Indian Petrochemicals Ltd, Vadodara 



20 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CHD 8 (419). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



{ 



Telephone 

323 76 17 
323 38 41 



{ 



{ 
( 



337 84 99,337 85 61 
337 86 26,337 91 20 



I 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



23502 16,2350442 
235 15 19,23523 15 

832 92 95,832 78 58 
832 78 91,832 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR.COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAP.GHAZIABAD.GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



