**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10974-1 (1984) : Code for hygienic conditions for 

production, transport, storage and distribution of 

indigenous milk products, Part 1: KHOA and KHOA based 

sweets [FAD 15: Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other 
Systems] 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i %^s^^^>^i^: 



^^CVVVfa^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 10974 ( Parti ) - 1984 

(Reaffirmed 2001) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 1 KliOA and KMOA BASED SWEETS 



l - DC 637 14 k 1 10 A +664 144004 3/4: 613 6 




© Copyright 1984 

INUJAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAN Alt BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH 2 AFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI mm? 

Gr 4 November 1984 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 )- 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 1 KHOA and KHOA BASED SWEETS 

Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, AFDC 36 
Chairman Representing 

Dr A. N. RaiChowdhury National Institute of Communicable Diseases 

( DGHS ), New Delhi 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
to the Government of India ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. P. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute (ICAR), 

Izatnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Dr (Shrimati) Indira Chakraborty All India Institute of Hygiene & Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Shri Om P. Dhamua Export Inspection Council of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 
Executive Health Officer Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 

Bombay 
Municipal Analyst ( Alternate ) 
Col O. P. Kapoor Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri Thiru S. Kasturi Government Analyst to the Government of 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri S. J. Kekobad Cadbury India Ltd, Bombay 

Maj-Gen Kewal Krishna Directorate General Armed Forces Medical 

Services, New Delhi 
Col N. L. Sachdeva ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright undert the said Act. 



ES : 10974 ( Part 1 )- 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) ■ 

Members Representing 

Dr ( Shrimati ) R. Sankaran Defence Food Research Laboratory, Ministry 

of Defence ( R & D ), Mysore 
Dr ( SHRiMATT ) D. Vijaya Rao ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. K. Sen Northern Railway, New Delhi 

Shri G. D. Sharma Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, New 

Delhi 
Dr B. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
Col L. R. Sharma Health Department, Municipal Corporation 

of Delhi, Delhi 
Dr A. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr I. A. Siddiqi Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & 

Fats, Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, 
New Delhi 
Shri S. M. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR), 

Karnal 
Dr S. C. Sarma ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. A. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. K. Grover 
Assistant Director ( Agri <ft Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcommittee, AFDC 36 : 5 
Convener 
Dr R. S. Singh National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
to the Government of India Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. P. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Izatnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Brahme Deonar Abbatoire, Bombay 

Dr D, N. Gore ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. R. Choudhuri Department of Food Technology and 

Bio-chemical Engineering, Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 
Shri C. T. Dwarakanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

( Continued on page 13 ) 



IS : 10974 ( Parti )- 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 1 KHOA and KHOA BASED SWEETS 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 )was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 5 March 1984, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0,2 Indigenous milk products, such as KHOA based sweets, DAHI, 
RASOGOLLA CHHANA are produced in large quantities in India. It 
has been often observed that proper hygienic conditions are not main- 
tained in production, transport, storage and distribution of these indi- 
genous milk products and there is a considerable scope for improving the 
hygienic conditions in this respect. Unless proper hygienic norms are 
adopted, the consumption of such indigenous milk products may be a 
potential health hazard to consumers. 

0.3 As the process of production, handling, transport, storage and 
distribution of various indigenous milk products differ very widely, 
codes of hygienic conditions for different milk products are being 
published in parts; Part 2 covers DAHI, Part 3 covers CHHANA and 
CHHANA based sweetmeats, Part 4 covers KULFI and Part 5 covers 
SHRIKHAND. 

0.4 KHOA (KHAVA or MAVA) refers to the milk product prepared by 
partial dehydration of milk by heating under constantly stirred conditions. 
KHOA forms an important base for preparation of indigenous milk 
sweets, such as BURFI, PEDA and GULABJAMAN. Traditionally, 
KHOA is prepared in open mild steel vessals with no protection against 
contamination from extraneous matter such as dust, ash, flies and 
pests. It is also improperly packaged using ordinary paper, green leaves 
and gunny bags before transportation. Since the product contains most of 
the essential nutrients of milk in a concentrated form, it provides an ideal 
medium for rapid proliferation of most micro organisms resulting in 
early deterioration and limited shelf life. It is, therefore, very necessary 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 

to take adequate precautions to protect the product during production, 
storage and distribution from all possible sources of contamination. 
This standard provides guidelines for maintaining optimum hygienic 
conditions in production, storage and distribution of KHOA and KHOA 
based sweets. 

0.5 It is expected that this standard would be of considerable assistance 
to local health authorities in enforcing proper hygienic conditions in the 
interest of public health. 

0.6 This code is subject to the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and rules framed thereunder as amended from 
time to time and other local regulations. 

0.7 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from the National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code ( Part 1 ) prescribes the hygienic conditions and hygienic 
practices required for production, storage transportation and distribution 
of KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 

2. SITE AND PREMISES 

2.1 Site — The factory or premises manufacturing KHOA shall be 
situated in clean and healthy locality away from road side where un- 
desirable dust arises due to vehicular traffic, garbage dumps, cattle 
sheds, open sewage drains or other places likely to breed flies. No part 
of the factory be used for residential purposes and it shall be free from 
obnoxious fumes, smoke, odour or excessive dust. 

2.2 The factory should preferably have the following features: 

a) Space around it on all sides, subject to the existing local 
municipal regulations. A minimum space of six metres all 
around is recommended; 

b) Inner ground clean and preferably paved or turfed to lay the 
dust; and 

c) Adequate dust-proof access ways for all vehicular traffic. 

2.3 Building 

2.3.1 Structure — The building shall be of a permanent nature and 
shall be of brick and lime plaster, cement concrete or any other material 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 

which ensures cleanliness. The construction of the building shall be 
such that it is rodent proof and as far as possible insect proof. 

2.3.2 Ventilation and Lighting — The factory, shall be adequately light- 
ed and ventilated keeping in mind the number of workers, their hours of 
work and nature of operation. Ventilation and lighting shall be in 
accordance with the Factories Act, 1948, wherever coapplicable. 

2.3.3 Floor — The floor shall be smooth, washable, properly sloped to 
gullies connected to sewers or draines. It shall be impervious to water 
and not affected by weak acids, alkalies, or steam. Floor of the packing 
room and godowns shall be made of cements or stone. 

2.3.4 Ceiling — The ceiling shall be capable of being cleaned properly. 
The roofing shall preferably be reinforced cement concrete. Galvanized 
iron sheets and thatches shall be strictly avoided for roofing. 

2.3.5 Internal Wall — The internal wall shall be smooth and preferably 
faced to a height of at least 1"5 metres with impervious material capable 
of being washed. Walls shall be rounded off at corners to avoid accumu- 
lation of dust and dirt. 

2.3.6 Doors and Windows — The production and storage apartments 
shall be provided with effective means to prevent entry of flies and 
insects. They should be provided with self closing double doors. The 
doors and windows should be covered with fly proof wire mesh and 
should open outwards. 

2.3.7 Drainage — Effective drainage should be provided to drain off 
water used for washing the equipment; utensils; and floor, etc. The 
slope of the foor should be towards the drains. The drain openings 
should be provided with screen traps to prevent solid matter from clog- 
ging the drains. The ends of the drains leading to the outside of the 
factory should be made rodent-proof by providing screens. 

2.3.8 Repairs — The building should be maintained in a proper state 
of repair and cleanliness, whenever required, it should be lime washed, 
painted and disinfected. 

2.3.9 General Considerations 

2.3.9.1 No portion of the building shall be used for domestic 
purposes or other types of food preparations unless separated by suitable 
partitions or locations. 

2.3.9.2 Separate rooms of sufficient size should be provided for 
processing and storage of KHOA. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 

2.3.9.3 Adequate facilities for the cleaning and sterilization of 
equipment and containers, such as clean water, sinks, wash up tanks and 
holding detergent solutions, suitable containers for chemical sterilants, 
steaming chest or jets and arrangements for steam and hot water should 
be provided in a separate room. The boiler should be housed in a 
separate room adequately protected to keep off contamination of the 
product. 

3. EQUIPMENT 

3.1 Heating Pans 

3.1.1 KADAHIES ( Heating pans ) of iron are generally used in small 
scale operations for heating milk on open fire for preparing KHOA. 
KADAHIES shall be constructed with hemispherical or dished bottom 
and should have rigid welded handles. The joints in the pan shall be 
welded and finished smooth. The component parts shall not be rivetted. 
The KADAHI may be of 20 to 25 litres capacity. 

3.2 Heating of Milk 

3.2.1 Ovens of different types are used for heating of milk in small 
scale production of KHOA. Wood charcoal, coal, cow dung cake, 
kerosene or gas, are normally used as fuel. 

3.2.2 When open hearth is used, the fuel used for burning should not 
give rise to smoke or obnoxious odour which may be absorbed by the 
product. Adequate protection must be provided to ventilate the combus- 
tion products and to prevent the ash and unburnt material coming in 
contact with the product. 

3.2.3 Where heating is done by steam in large scale operations, the pan 
shall conform to IS : 2829-1979*. Stainless steel jacketted, round 
bottomed open pan provided with steam line, steam control and safety 
valves, pressure gauge and cold water line in the jacket, with steam trap 
and air outlet may be used. There should be arrangements for 
tilting the pan and also keeping it fixed in normal position. 

3.3 Stirrers — During heating of milk, the contents in the heating pan 
are constantly stirred to facilitate evaporation of moisture and to 
prevent charring of casein. For this purpose, hand operated stirrers 
are generally used. Stainless steel or aluminium alloy stirrers with 
flattened end on one side may preferably be used in place of iron. Sui- 
table arrangements may be made on the brim of the heating pan for 
resting of stirrers. 



♦Specification for steam jacketted ghee pans ( stainless steel ) (first revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 

3.4 All the components and metallic parts which come in contact with 
milk and KHOA shall be constructed from iron or stainless steel confor- 
ming to grade 07 Cr 18 Ni 9 of IS : 1570 ( Part 5 ) - 1972* or aluminium 
conforming to IS Designations 31000 ( NS 3 ), 52000 ( NS 4 ) or 53000 
(NS5)ofIS:737-1974t- 

3.5 Copper and its alloys, cadmium, lead and zinc shall not come in 
contact with KHOA at any stage. 

3.6 Non-metallic materials, if used for sealing or gasketting shall be 
non-toxic, non absorbent and shall not impart any flavour and should be 
inert to milk, KHOA or any cleaning solution normally used. 

3.7 Fabrication — All surfaces coming in contact with milk or KHOA 
shall be finished smooth, free from pits, crevices or other constructional 
features which might inhibit satisfactory sanitation. 

4. RECEPTION DOCK 

4.1 It is the key stage in regard to quality of milk. Milk brought to the 
factory shall be received in an airy spacious enclosure which is separated 
from the processing room. Only fresh, sweet, cleanmilk free from colo- 
strum and in every way fit for human consumption shall be used. The 
milk shall be free from adulterants, preservatives and any matter 
foreign to milk. 

5. TRANSFER OF KHOA TO CONTAINERS 

5.1 When KHOA attains the desired consistency and texture, it is remo- 
ved from the heating pan and stored either in bulk or transferred to 
smaller containers of 0*5 to TO kg capacity in order to give the product 
a regular shape and also to emboss on it the seal of the manufacturer. 
Usually aluminium containers are used for this purpose. 

5.1.1 The metallic containers used in such transfers, with which the 
product comes in contact should be non-toxic, corrosion resistant 
and be kept cleaned and sanitized thoroughly before use. It is necessary 
that such transfers are made from the heating pan to other containers 
with the help of a clean scoop or ladle and not touched by hand. The 
scope or ladle be cleaned and sanitized before each usage. 

5.1.2 Printing — The seal used for printing or embossing on the 
surface of the product should be made of non-toxic materials. It should 



♦Schedule for wrought steels: Part 5 Stainless and heat-resisting steels {first 
revision ). 

fSpecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, sheet and strip 
( for general engineering purposes ) ( second revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 )- 1984 

be cleaned and sanitized before each usage by dipping in a disinfectant 
solution and wiping with a clean dry cloth in order to prevent it from 
becoming a source of contamination, 

6. PACKAGING AND TRANSPORT 

6.1 Various types of wrapping materials like tree leaves, paper parch- 
ment paper, etc, are used for covering the KHOA blocks after 
manufacture. The smaller units of KHOA are then packed in metallic 
containers, tin boxes or bamboo baskets which are sometimes covered 
with coarse cloth or gunny bags, and then transported to urban market. 

6.2 It is desirable to provide always a parchment or a flexible wrapping 
to the product as soon as it is manufactured and moulded into shape. 
The material used for wrapping should be purchased from approved 
sources and preferably be presanitized and stored under hygienic condi- 
tions. If parchment paper used is suspected to be exposed it should be 
dipped in boiling water prior to use. Treating the paper in chlorine 
solution ( 15 to 20 ppm ) prior to use, would also be satisfactory. An 
ideal wrapper should be completely opaque, sealable, impermeable to 
odour, moisture and grease and should have sufficient physical rigidity 
to preclude damage during packing. A secondary outer packaging like 
fibre card board, wooden or metal container should also be used for 
facilitating transporting. All reusable secondary containers should be 
presterilized before use. 

6.3 Storage at Manufacturing Centre — KHOA should be stored at tem- 
peratures not exceeding 4°C, until taken out for transporting to urban 
markets. 

6.4 Transport — During the transport of KHOA from manufacturing 
centres to urban markets, precautions should be taken not to expose 
the product to sunlight, dust and contamination. It is advisable 
to make suitable arrangements to maintain KHOA below 4°C during 
transport. 

7. STORAGE AT URBAN MARKET 

7.1 KHOA blocks should be maintained at to 4°C during storage. 
These should preferably be stored in a wrapped condition. The product 
should however be disposed off for conversion into sweet meat prepara- 
tion well in time before deterioration due to microbial activity sets in. It 
is advisable not to store the product for more than a week at to 4°C. 

7.1.1 It is recommended that suitable refrigeration facilities be 
provided to the apartments used for storing KHOA, for maintaining 
the product at to 4°C. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 

7.1.2 The apartment used for storage should be dust proof, insect- 
proof and also rodent-proof. The shelves used for placing KHOA 
blocks may either be made from or covered with laminated wooden 
panels stainless steel sheets or glazed tiles. The shelves should be 
maintained in a thoroughly clean condition. They should be periodi- 
cally washed thoroughly with suitable detergent solutions and cleaning 
agents sanitized and dried well before blocks are placed. 

8. SALE AND DISTRIBUTION 

8.1 It is a general practice to handle, unwrapped KHOA blocks by 
more than one person with bare hands for the purpose of testing the 
samples and during weighing while selling to retailers. The product 
also comes in contact with the pan of the balance which is kept exposed 
and rarely cleaned. Such practices lead to the contamination of the 
product with micro-organisms and if such a proudct is subsequently 
stored for periods exceeding 18 to 24 hours at room temperature ( about 
30°C ) prior to conversion into sweet meats, it provides an opportunity 
for the micro-organisms to multiply. Some of the organisms like 
toxigenic staphylococci may produce heat stable enterotoxins without 
producing any visible defect in the product. This may lead to outbreak 
of food poisoning when sweet meats prepared from these products 
are consumed. 

8.2 It is, therefore, advisable to protect the product from being touched 
by hands. Use of metallic scoops, ladles, spoons or cheese triers which 
have been cleaned and sanitized, is recommended for sampling, testing 
and weighing. 

8.3 One block from each lot of KHOA may preferably be kept apart 
for sampling and testing. This practice will ensure storage of other 
blocks in a protected condition. 

8.4 It is recommended to cover the pan of the balance with a clean 
sheet of parchment paper before any block of KHOA is placed over 
it for weighing. 

8.5 It is recommended that the product should be sold to the customers 
in covered condition by wrapping with a clean parchment paper. 

9. KHOA BASED SWEETS 

9.1 Several varieties of sweetmeats like BURFI, PEDA 9 GULABJAMAN, 
KALAKAND, milk cakes, etc, are prepared from KHOA. The methods 
of preparation vary considerably but addition of sugar is an essential 
step in all the preparations. It is added either as a powder or as a 
syrup and the KHOA is further processed under controlled heating 
conditions. The mixture is then spread, excepting in the case of 



IS : 10974 (Part 1 )- 1984 

GULABJAMAN, on a plate, or wooden table, allowed to cool and cut 
into small pieces of desired shape and size. Edible colours and flavour- 
ings are also added in some preparations. In the preparation of different 
varieties of BURFI, other ingredients like coconut, PISTA, fruits and 
RAVA are incorporated in the product to cater to special tastes. In 
some parts of the country CHHANA is also used as an ingredient for 
partial replacement of KHOA. In the preparation of GULABJAMAN, 
maida flour is added to KHOA to get the desired consistency for 
purposes of frying. In addition, food additives like antioxidants, preserva- 
tives permitted under Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 may 
be used in the preparation of some KHOA based sweets. 

9.2 Sweetening Agent — Cane sugar is the most commonly used sweet- 
ening agent in the preparation of KHOA based sweets. Sugar used 
should be of good quality ( see IS : 1679-1960* ). 

9.3 The sugar should be clean and properly packed, preferably in multi- 
wall paper bags and stored in a clean dry place to prevent contamina- 
tion from moulds and yeasts. If sugar is improperly packed in dirty 
gunny or cloth bags and handled carelessly it may become heavily 
contaminated particularly during monsoon. It is preferable to purchase 
sugar during dry season and store it in a clean dry place. 

9.4 If sugar is suspected to be heavily contaminated it may be made 
into a syrup and boiled for a few minutes before adding to KHOA. 

10. OTHER INGREDIENTS 

10.1 The ingredients used for preparation of BARFI shall conform to 
IS : 5550-1970f. Maida used in preparation of GULABJAMAN shall 
conform to IS : 1009-1979J. 

10.2 Flavouring Materials — Various artificial or imitation flavours are 
added to KHOA based sweets. As most of them are prepared and main- 
tained in the form of alcoholic solutions and used in small concentra- 
tions they are not considered to be significant sources of contamination. 

10.3 Aqueous flavour extracts may be sterilized by pasteurization at 
63°C for 30 minutes without any serious deterioration in the flavour. 

10.4 Colouring Materials — Only food grade colours permitted under 
PFA Act, 1954 should be used in the KHOA based sweet preparations. 



♦Specification for sugar used in food preservation industry. 

fSpecification for BURFI. 

^Specification for MAIDA for general purposes ( second revision ). 



10 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 ) - 1984 

11. STORAGE AND SALE OF KHOA BASED SWEETS 

11.1 Rastaurants, catering establishments, HALWAIS, sweet meat 
shops and other selling outlets which store and sell KHOA based sweets 
in retail to customers should be fully licensed for the purpose and fulfil 
all the hygienic requirements prescribed by the appropriate authorities 
in respect of public catering places. 

11.2 The floor and drains of the premises and every bench, counter, stall 
or other place where KHOA based sweets are stored or exposed for sale 
should be washed and cleaned effectively every day using an odourless 
bactericidal solution (for example, Quaternary Ammonium Com- 
pounds ). There should be sufficient amount of clean water and deter- 
gents for cleaning of utensils. Suitable arrangements for toilet, washing 
of hands, plates and disposal of wrapping materials, if any, should be 
provided. 

11.3 It is desirable to store KHOA based sweets at a low temperature 
( below 4°C ) so that they will have a longer shelf life. Suitable cold 
storage facilities may therefore be provided. 

12. DISTRIBUTION 

12.1 Sweet meats prepared from KHOA should not be allowed to get 
contaminated during distribution which shall be effected in the most 
hygienic and efficient way. 

12.2 Products stored for a long period should not be distributed. 

12.3 The product should be distributed in suitable pre-sterilized contai- 
ners which may be kept closed. In case of bulk delivery the containers 
should have well fitting lids. 

13. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

13.1 Every person employed in connection with production and sale 
of the indigenous milk products shall be medically examined by an 
authorized registered medical practitioner and the examination shall 
include X-ray of the chest for tuberculoses. The examination shall also 
include examination of stool for protozoal and helminthic infection for 
those parasites which are transmitted by ingestion, and for the presence 
of Salmonella, Shigella species, Vibrio cholerae and other pathogens. 
Subsequently the employee shall be medically examined once in a year 
or more frequently, if necessary, to ensure that he is medically fit and 
free from communicable diseases. A record of such examination shall 
be maintained. 

13.2 It shall be impressed on all employees that they should notify the 
medical officer or management, cases of fever, vomitcing, diarrhoea, 

11 



IS : 10974 ( Part 1 )- 1984 

typhoid, dysentery, boils, cuts, sores and ulcers ( however small ), 
discharging ears and notifiable diseases occurring in thier own homes and 
families. 

13.3 No worker who is suspected to be suffering from any of the disor- 
ders listed in 13.1 and 13.2 shall be permitted to work in the shop. The 
supervisor or health authorities should check the personal hygiene 
of the workers before the start of work and whenever they enter any 
sweet meat shop after any absence. 

13.4 Employees shall keep their finger nails short and clean and wash 
their hands with soap or detergent and water before commencing work 
and after each absence, specially after using sanitary conveniences. 
Towels used for drying hands should be clean. Disposable sanitary 
paper towels/hot air drier should be preferred in place of cloth 
towels. No worker shall allow his hands or any part of his body or 
clothing to come in contact with the product. He should adopt strict 
hygienic practices so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination to 
the milk product. 

13.5 All the employees shall be inoculated and vaccinated against the 
enteric group of diseases as prescribed by the health authorities. 

13.6 No worker shall be allowed to work without proper clothing. 

13.7 Employees shall be provided with clean uniforms (preferably 
white) or aprons or both and clean gloves, masks and head gears, where 
necessary. 

13.8 The uniforms shall not be worn outside the working place but put 
on just before starting the work and changed when leaving. The emplo- 
yee shall wear a washed and cleaned uniform/apron each day and if 
badly soiled shall change it even within the working day. 

13.9 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of tobacco in any form 
including smoking or chewing betel leaves shall be prohibited within 
the processing, packing and storage area of the shop. Notice to this 
effect shall be prominently displayed and enforced. 

13.10 A wash basin ( sometimes more than one ) with adequate provi- 
sion of soap and towel shall be provided. The wash basins shall be 
installed in or along side the sanitary conveniences. 

13.11 The importance of hygienic and aesthetic standards should be 
inculcated to the personnel since carelessness at any stage will endanger 
the health of the consumers. 



12 



IS: 10974 (Parti )- 19S4 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr B. N. Ghosh AH India Institute of Hygiene and Pubitc 

Health, Calcutta 
Dr S. P. Mukhopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. C. Ghoshal Central Health Education Bureau < DGHS ), 

New Delhi 
Dr M. N. Gurnani Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay 

Joint Director ( Prevention of Delhi Administration, Delhi 

Food Adulteration ) 
Col O. P. Kapur Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Dr V. V. Karnik Brooke Bond India Limited, Aurangabad 

Dr S. J. Pardikar ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. K. Nandi Food and Nutrition Board, Ministry of Food 

and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Shri Harpal Singh ( Alternate ) . 

Dr P. V. R. C. Panicker National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Dr ( Shrimati ) A. S. Gadkari ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ravi Krishna Britannia Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Secretary Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri Kailash Vyas Kaira Distt Cooperative Milk Producers 

Union Limited, Anand 
Dr Bruesh Narayan ( Alternate ) 



13 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Length 


metre 


m 


Mass 


kilogram 


kg 


Time 


second 


s 


Electric current 


ampere 


A 


Thermodynamic 


Icelvin 


K 


temperature 






Luminous intensity 


caudeta 


cd 


Amount of substance 


mole 


moi 


Supplementary Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Plane angle 


radian 


rad 


Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 


Derived Units 






Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Force 


new ton 


N 


Energy 


joule 


J 


Power 


watt 


W 


Fiux 


weber 


Wb 


Flux density 


tesla 


r 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


s 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

1 N - I kg.m/s* 
1 J ~ 1 N.m 

I W - 1 l/g. 

lWb-lV.s 
I T - 1 Wb/ma 
\ Hz = 1 c/s (s .i) 
1 S - 1 A/V 
1 V ~ 1 W/A 
1 Pa = l N/m2 



14 



