**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1198 (1982) : Code of practice for laying, fixing and 
maintenance of linoleum floor [CED 5: Flooring, Wall 
Finishing and Roofing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

LAYING, FIXING AND MAINTENANCE OF 

LINOLEUM FLOORS 

(First Revision) 

First Reprint JUNE 1996 



UDC 69.025.355.2 : 006.76 



® Copyright 1982 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Br 4 December 1982 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

LAYING, FIXING AND MAINTENANCE OF 

LINOLEUM FLOORS 

(First Revision) 

Flooring and Plastering Sectional Committee, BDC 5 

Ckairtnan 

Shri O. P. Mittal 

C4/56 Safdarjung Development Area 

New Delhi 110016 

Mmbefs Representing 

Shri B. T. Antxa Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri M. Q. Dandavatb ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. R. Das ,( Alternate ) ,»,.*«. 

Brio P. M. Bhatia Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri Dinbsh A. Chokshi Arcov Industries, Ahmadabad 

ShriRasikxal A. Chokski (Alternate) , 

Director Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik 

Reskaroh Officer, Material 

• TestTno Division ( Alternate ) m _ , . , ,. 

Dr V. Sr Gupta * The Fertilizer ( Planning & Development ) India 

Ltd, Sindri 
Shri K. V. Gurubwamy Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri G. V. Pangarkar ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director ( Arch ) RDSO Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Deputy Director. (Arch) 
RDSO, ( Alternate ) , _ 

Shri S. C Kapoor Modern Tiles & Marbles, New Delhi 

Shri A. C. Kapoor ( Alternate ).*^-* 
Shri C. P. Kapani Builder's Association of India, Bombay 

Shri G. P. Lahxri Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri T. S. Bhaoat ^Alternate ) 
Shri K. E. S. Mani Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Rambsh D. Patel ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr Mohan Rai 



Representing 



Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 
Roorkee 
Dr R. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Muruqappan Coromandal Prodorite P"t Ltd, Madras *^ 

Shri R. Srintvasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. P. Ratra National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri D. B. Sen Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay 

Shri S. B. Shxromany ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Gol M. P. Sharma Engineer-in-Ghief' s Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri A. P. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Shrtvastava Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shri Darshan Singh ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

( Planning & Designs Circle ) Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer 

( Building Centre Division ) ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Surveyor of Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Works ( CZ ) 
Surveyor of Works I ( CZ ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. M. Mathur 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



Convener 
DrR. K.Jain 



Linoleum Subcommittee) BDG 5 : 2 



Central Building Research Institute (CSIR) 
Roorkee 



Members 

Shri A. T. Basax Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 

Shri B. B. Ghowdhury ( Alternate ) 

Shri T. S. Biddappa National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Dr A. B. Dias ( Alternate ) 

Shri Anilendu Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri K. K. Maniar Ministry of Railways 

Shri H. M. Nandkeolyar India Linoleums Ltd, Birlapur 



IS: 1198 -1982 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

LAYING, FIXING AND MAINTENANCE OF 

LINOLEUM FLOORS 

(First Revision) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 2 February 1982, after the draft finalized by the 
Flooring and Plastering Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Linoleum provides a satisfactory floor for residential and public build- 
ings, railway coaches, ships, etc. It is also suitable for most types of non- 
industrial floors. In light industry such as in electronic industry, linoleum 
flooring may be used, as the risk of damage by cutting, to which linoleum 
is vulnerable, is small. However, if linoleum gets wet, it expands and eventu- 
ally rots. This standard has been prepared with a view to guiding the users 
in regard to laying, fixing and maintenance of linoleum floors. 

0.3 This standard was first published in 1958. It is being revised to 
incorporate improvements found necessary in the light of usage of the 
standard and the suggestions made by various bodies implementing it. 
In this revision a separate clause on suitability of linoleum for various 
conditions of use has been added and the materials used as underlays for 
aspects like preparation of subfloors, fixing of underlays, laying of linoleum 
has been dealt with, in detail. This revision also suggests the laying and 
fixing method of linoleum in tile form. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS 1 1199 - 1982 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard recommends details of work necessary for laying, fixing 
initial treatment, and subsequent maintenance df linoleum flooring in 
sheet and tile form. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply. 
2*1 Sub-Floor — The surface on which flooring is to be laid. 

2.2 Underlay — A layer of prefabricated material or in-situ filling on the 
sub-floor to provide a smooth level surface to receive the flooring. 

3. NECESSARY INFORMATION 

3.1 For the efficient planning and execution of the work, detailed infor- 
mation with regard to the following is necessary: 

a) Purpose for which the floor is to be used; 

b) Floor area to be covered; 

c) Location and size of openings and ducts, drainage outlets, if any, 
to rie left out; 

d) Details of the sub-floor; 

e) Type of soil in the sub-base and any seepage problem. 

3.2 All the information stated in 3.1 shall be made available by the appro- 
priate authority responsible for the construction of the whole building to 
those who are entrusted with the work of laying linoleum floor finish before 
the work is started. Necessary drawings and instructions for preparatory 
work shall also be given where required. 

3.3 Arrangements shall also be made for the proper exchange of information 
between those engaged in laying the floor and all others whose work will 
affect or will be affected. 

4. SUITABILITY 

4.1 Linoleum is suitable for use in domestic buildings, and those of non- 
industrial character where the traffic is expected to be essentially pedestrian. 
However, the following factors must be considered before it is being laid. 
The thicknesses recommended are 4*5 and 32 mm for commercial and 
institutional buildings respectively and 1*6 mm for domestic or where 
traffic is low. 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

4.1.1 Resistance to Rising Damp — Linoleum requires an adequately dry 
sub-floor. If inconvenience of damp proofing are not acceptable, linoleum 
should not be used. 

4.1.2 Exposure to Weather — Linoleum is not suitable for installation 
except where it is wholly inside a building. 

4.1.3 Resistance to Chemicals — Linoleum is resistant to oils, fats and 
greases. Thicker gauges shall be used where heavy traffic is expected. 

4.1.4 Indentation Resistance — Linoleum is not resistant to indentations 
particularly from heels or static load. Cork tile will withstand heavy foot 
traffic but indents if heavy objects are left in one position for some time 
or pushed. 

4.1.5 Slip Resistance — ■ Linoleum when highly polished or wet can become 
dangerously slippry. The polish with a reduced tendency to slippriness 
may be used. The cork tile flooring provide a slip resistant surface except 
when liquid wax polish is applied over a seal. 

5. MATERIAL 

5.1 Flooring — The flooring shall comply with the requirement specified 
in IS : 653-1981*. 

5.2 Underlay — The underlay may be as given below: 

a) For Timber Subfloors: 

i) Plywood at least 4 mm thick ( see IS : 303-1975f ) ; 
ii) Hardboard at least 3 mm thick ( see IS : 1658-1977J ) ; and 
Hi) Fibre based bitumen felt 1 mm thick {see IS : 1322-1970§). 

b) For Concrete Subfloors: 

i) Bitumen mastic ( see IS : 1195-1978 ), and|| 
ii) Bitumen ( see IS : 1580-1969^ ), 

5.3 Adhesives — The type of adhesive to be used and the manner of use 
shall be those recommended by the floor covering manufacturer and the 
adhesive shall be compatible with the floor covering and suitable for bonding 
the floor covering to the underlay or sub-floor. Adhesives shall not be consi- 
dered effective as damp-proof membrane. Information on types of adhesives 
is given in Appendix A. 



♦Specification for linoleum sheet and tiles ( second revision ). 
t Specification for plywood for general purposes ( second revision ). 
{Specification for fibre hardboards ( second revision ). 

{Specification for bitumen felts for waterproofing and damp-proofing ( second revision ). 
[(Specification for bitumen mastic for flooring {first revision ). 

^Specification for bituminous compounds for waterproofing and caulking purposes 
(first revision ). 



IS : 1198- 1982 

6. PREPARATION OF SUBFLOORS 

6.1 The linoleum flooring gives maximum service if laid on a firm base. 
Evaporation of the moisture from the subfloor cannot take place once 
linoleum is laid. Therefore, it is important that subfloors should be tho- 
roughly dry before laying of the linoleum. An irregular subfloor surface 
creates poor adhesion between the subfloor and the linoleum. Therefore, 
the subfloor should always be smooth and level. Recommended treatments 
for different subfloors are given under 6.2 to 6.4. 

6.2 Timber — All timber subfloors shall be sound, rigid, level and dry. 
The timber should be at equilibrium moisture content at the time it is 
covered with the underlay or the floor covering. A timber floor should 
always be well-ventilated, to discourage fungal attack. 

6.2.1 New Timber Floors — In the case of new construction, seasoned 
and treated timber shall be used and shall be of tongued and grooved 
boarding. Boards shall be narrow and of equal width (say 100mm). 
Boards of unequal width have various degree of shrinkage. Before fixing 
the linoleum, all nail heads on the timber subfloor shall be punched down, 
irregulations planned off and the holes filled with plaster, plastic wood or 
similar fillers. After the boards have been nailed to the joists, the floor is 
usually firm enough for direct laying of the linoleum, but however, under- 
lays such as plywood or hardboard or fibre based bitumen felt may be 
used prior to fixing of the linoleum to prevent any movement in the boards. 
Suspended timber floor shall be adequately ventilated with a minimum 
air gap below the underside of the joist to stop the growth of rot. Wood 
blocks and boarded floor on concrete on the ground shall not be covered 
with linoleum unless an efficient damp-proof membrane in the concrete 
below the blocks or boards has been provided. 

6.2.2 Existing Timber Floor — In the case of an existing timber floor, 
covered with boarding when it is not possible to obtain an even surface 
or in cases of dry rot, the use of diagonal boarding is. recommended, after 
removing and replacing some of the badly affected boarding and filling 
in the cracks with plastic wood or similar filler and after disinfecting the 
floor. Alternatively, plywood topping on the existing boarding also gives 
an even surface. It is important, however, to see that the floor is well- 
ventilated, and if it is a ground floor, by means of air-ducts in the outer 
walls and sleeper walls with honeycombed pattern for free circulation 
of air. 

63 Concrete — All concrete subfloor may be finished with a cement and 
sand or fine concrete screed laid according to the recommendations of 
IS : 2571-1970*. 'the subfloor surface shall be smooth and flat. Concrete 



♦Code of practice for laying in situ cement concrete flooring (first revision ). 

6 



IS : 1198- 1982 

is not completely impervious. As moisture either in liquid or in vapour 
form and rising damp may cause damage to linoleum, concrete subfloor 
intended as a base for linoleum shall contain an effective damp-proof 
coarse. The damp-proof course shall be laid in any one of the ways given 
below. 

6.3-1 The most effective treatments for existing floors to protect it 
against rising damp is a layer of bitumen mastic not less than 15 mm 
thick laid over the subfloor according to the recommendations given in 
IS : 1196-1978*. 

6.3.2 For new work the subfloor shall be laid as per the recommendation 
given in IS : 2571-1970|. Information on the limitations of damp-proof 
materials is given in Appendix B. 

6.3.3 Waterproofing materials mixed with concrete do not produce an 
effective barrier against rising damp. 

6.3.4 Before linoleum is laid, ample time shall be allowed for the water 
to dry from both suspended and ground concrete floors. It is difficult to 
specify the period required as this depends on weather and on the quality 
and thickness of the concrete, but. a period of 4 to 8 weeks at least shall 
be allowed for drying under normal conditions. This time may be reduced 
if the building is heated and if the ventilation is good. 

6.3.5 In new work, the finish required for laying linoleum shall be 
usually produced with a steel trowel on a screed applied to the base concrete. 
The finish may, however, be produced on the base concrete itself if a power- 
float is used. With old concrete, if the surface is only slightly uneven, the 
holes shall be filled with a skim layer of proprietory bitumen-cement or 
latex-cement levelling coat. For rougher surfaces, an underlay of asphalt, 
bitumen-cement or latex-cement is necessary. Of these, latex-cement can 
be used in the least thickness. If sub-floors are dusty, it is a safe practice 
to use a primer such as bitumen emulsion before using an adhesive. Concrete 
hardeners or densifiers may also be used with advantage to bind the surface 
of the screed. 

6.4 Other Subfloors — Some bases such as clay tiles, concrete tiles or 
terrazo are unaffected by dampness, but may be sufficiently porous to 
allow moisture to pass through to the back of the floor finish. These bases 
shall be damp-proofed when necessary by using underfelt. Bases such as 
magnesium oxychloride in good conditions are suitable for receiving lino- 
leum but are adversely affected by dampness rising through concrete from 
the ground and shall not be covered with a damp-proof layer. Unless it 



♦Code of practice for laying bitumen mastic flooring ( second revision ). 
tCode of practice for laying in situ cement concrete flooring (first revision ). 



IS : 1198 ~ 1982 

can be established that there is an effective damp course below these 
materials, they shall be removed before laying the linoleum. Bitumen 
mastics are excellent bases to receive linoleum but solvent type adhesives 
may soften the mastic and mastics which are soft and are likely to be dented 
are not suitable for linoleum. 

7. LAYING 

7.1 General — Linoleum should be stored in room temperature of not 
less than 20°C for at least 48 hours before it is unrolled. It shall be laid out 
flat for several days before it is cut to size because, after being unrolled, 
it shrinks in length and expands in width. As the humidity in the room is 
usually greater than that at which the linoleum was rolled, it absorbs 
moisture and being unrestrained, expands. If the linoleum is cut to fit 
closely round the skirting, it will often be found necessary after a time to 
retrim the material. When two widths of linoleum meet, they shall be left 
with one overlapping the other until expansion has stopped and then cut 
to fit. Cork tile should be dimensionally stable in the condition of use. 
In order to achieve this, tiles should be removed from the cartons at least 
48 hours before laying is to commence and be distributed in the room in 
humidity and temperature conditions similar to those likely to prevail in 
occupation. 

7.1.1 Before starting to lay the linoleum, the position and depth of 
cables, water pipes in the floor screed, etc, should be ascertained and all 
preliminary work should be completed. The subfloor should be firm and 
dry and tested for dampness as given in Appendix C. Dusty subfloor 
should be swept and porous subfloors should be primed as recommended 
by the adhesive manufacturer, 

7.2 Adhesives — The linoleum shall be laid either loose or fixed to the 
subfloor by means of suitable adhesives. Any priming coat should be allowed 
to dry before the adhessive is spread. Adhesives are spread with a closely 
notched trowel as recommended by the manufacturer to ensure even the 
coverage of the subfloor to the correct thickness. It is essential that where 
low flash solvent adhesive ( containing petroleum or naphtha ) are used, 
the use of naked lights should be prohibited in the vicinity of the laying 
operations. The area shall be well ventilated even when non-flammable 
solvents are used in the adhesives. Smoking shall be prohibited. 

7.3 Fixing of Underlays — Plywood, hardboard shall be securely fixed 
to the subfloor in the form of sheets using staple, and nails. Fixing shall 
start at the centre of the sheet and secured at 100 mm intervals around 
the side. All nail heads shall be finished flush with the surtace. Joint lines 
shall be staggered and every effort shall be made to prevent coincidence 
in joints in the sheet and timber base. A suitable gap shall be left between 
the sheets for possible expansion due to atmosphereic changes. Except 



IS : 1198 -1982 

where reconunended, hardboard may be laid with the smooth face upper- 
most. When a felt underlay is used all surfaces to be covered shall be 
thoroughly cleaned free from dust and dirt. No surface shall be cleaned 
with water as dryness is essential. Bitumen felts shall be cut to size a^cl 
fixed with the adhesives as recommended by the manufacturer. It shall/be 
butt jointed and laid across the boards so that the joints run in a direction 
at right angle to the joints in linoleum. The joints shall not coincide with 
those in linoleum sheets. After fixing) the felt shall be smoothed down and 
well rolled. Bitumen mastic shall be laid in accordance with the recommen- 
dations as given in IS : 1196-1978*; where the mastic is used as underlay 
and damp-proof coarse, care shall be taken to connect it with the damp- 
proof course in the walls. Other underlay as given in 5.2 should be laid 
as per the recommendations of the manufacturer. 

7.4 Fixing — The base over which the linoleum is to be fixed shall be 
thoroughly cleaned free from dirt and dust, chemicals, oils, paints, etc. 
The adhesive shall be spread evenly with a trowel as recommended by the 
manufacturer. The linoleum shall be firmly pressed into the adhesive 
within the recommended setting time of adhesive. To give maximum adhesive 
contact and to secure a bond, the material shall be well rolled with a floor 
roller weighing approximately 70 kg working from centre to the walls. 
If necessary the linoleum may be. loaded with sand bags at various points 
until the adhesive has gripped. When laid directly on concrete, it is desirable 
to prime the back of the linoleum with the adhesive. Cork tiles shall be 
fixed with the adhesive which should be spread evenly with the trowel 
in sufficient quantity for laying only a few square metres at a time. Each 
tile Shall be carefully placed in position to exclude air beneath the tile and 
also to attain proper joints between the tiles. It is advisable to use headless 
steel pins in conjunction with the adhesive in order to maintain contact 
between subfloor or screed and tile. The pins shall be driven below the 
surface of the tile with a hammer. If the subfloor or screed is too hard for 
pins, it may be necessary to weight down any lipping tiles. 

7.4.1 Coving and Skirting — Linoleum coving and skirting shall be formed 
from sheet material on the job in grades up to 3*2 mm thick. First, cove 
stick shall be fixed in the angle between floor and wall to give the correct 
contour to the cove. The linoleum, in the lengths up to 2*5 m is turned 
15 cm up the wall and runs 15 cm on to the floor. It is a skilled operation 
and even the best craftsman may have difficulty with angles. For thicker 
materials, some, floor layers make their coving in the workshop in 2 m 
lengths but each coving is purpose-made for a job. Radius of curvature 
of coving and skirting shall not be less than 12"5 cm. 



♦Code of practice for laying bitumen mastic flooring ( second revision ). 

9 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

7.5 Finish — After laying and fixing, all traces of adhesive shall be removed 
from the surface as the work proceeds within the setting time. Care shall 
Be taken to avoid the severing of adjacent surfaces. The surplus adhesive 
shall never be allowed to remain longer than 24 hours. The surface may be 
finished with a wax polish recommended by the manufacturer. Alternatively 
a coat of emulsion polish may be applied. The joints in case of cork tiles 
shall be lightly sanded with a fine grade abrasive paper. All traces of adhe- 
sives and dirt should be removed and the surface brushed clean. After 
brushing, the surface shall be wiped with a clean damp cloth to remove 
any further traces of dust or dirt when dry the surface may then be treated 
with two coats of concentrated paste wax polish as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 

7.6 Protection — When laying and finishing are completed, the flooring 
shall be protected with hardboard or other sheeting till completion of the 
building. 

8. MAINTENANCE 

8.1 General — A period of at least seven days should elapse after installa- 
tion of the flooring before the start of the maintenance work. During this 
time the flooring shall be covered and protected from the effect of other con- 
tract work in progress in the site. Preventive measures are essential part of 
flooring maintenance and since dirt and dust are mainly trafficked into a 
building from the outside it is important to remove these materials by use of 
dustretaining mats at all door entrance extending to the full width of the 
door and of sufficient length. The practices stated below should be avoided : 

a) Incorrect use of cleaning agents, 

b) Application of polishes and seals on dirty and wet surfaces, 

c) Attempts to build up high thickness of polish or seal by reducing 
the number of applications, and 

d) Excessive use of water. 

8.2 Linoleum Sheet or Tiles — The linoleum sheet or tile surfaces shall 
be swept clean preferably using a mop sweeper and then washed with a 
cloth dampened with an aqueous solution of neutral detergent. When 
dry the surface shall be buffed using suitable pad and two coats of dry 
bright water-based emulsion polish shall be applied. The surface shall be 
regularly maintained by sweeping, washing with neutral detergent solution, 
followed by polishing with a coat of water-based emulsion polish. 

8.3 If the traffic is light, the floor shall be given frequent brushing, regular 
polishing and an application of new polish every three to six weeks.. Under 
moderate traffic conditions, the floor shall be given an occasional wash 
with a wet mop but no detergents shall be used so that the polish is not 
removed. Application of polish shall be done every one to three weeks. 

10 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

Linoleum should not be overwaxed; when this condition develops, the 
coatings should be cleared off with white spirit or paraffin and a light 
even coat of polish or two of liquid dressing applied. When the linoleum 
has been polished, it will remain bright for a considerable period if a dry 
mop is applied each day. It is this daily 'dry polish' rather than the frequent 
application of polish itself that maintains the glossy surface. After exceptional 
heavy traffic, the linoleum should be swept with a hair broom, rubbed 
with a mop or cloth frequently rinsed in clean water, and finally rubbed 
dry. Washing is seldom necessary more than once every three or four 
months, when only a mild soap or soapless detergent should be used. 
Exceptionally heavy dirt may be removed with a cloth soaked in paraffin. 

8.4 Cork Tiles — The cork tiles shall be swept with a mop and then 
cleaned with a cloth dampened with an aqueous solution of neutral deter- 
ment and allowed to dry. Apply a thin and even coating of solvent-based 
liquid wax. When dry the surface shall be buffed using a fibre brush and 
a further coat of solvent based liquid wax shall be applied. The cork tiles 
shall be regularly swept and dry buffed frequently, when necessary the 
surface shall be cleaned with solvent-based wax remover and rewaxed. 



APPENDIX A 

(Clause 5.3) 

INFORMATION ON ADHESIVES 
A-l. VEGETABLE AND CASEIN GLUES 

A-l.l Vegetable ( starch ) glue is usually in the form of a paste, and casein 
glue usually in the form of a powder which is mixed with water before use. 
Both the types are spread on the base and the linoleum is pressed on to it. 
Vegetable adhesives are effective but take some time to harden. They 
are unsuitable for situations where a lot of water is likely to be spilt on the 
linoleum. These glues are liable to attack by fungi. 

A-2. LIGNIN PASTES 

A-2.1 Lignin, a by-product of paper manufacture is mixed with clay to 
form an adhesive which is applied thinly to the base and the linoleum 
pressed on to it. It resembles starch and casein glues but it is more resistant 
to water. 

A<& GUM-SPIRIT ADHESIVES 

A«3.1 Adhesives made from gum or resin, filler and methylated spirit are 
characterized by their strong smell. The adhesive is spread on the base 

11 



IS : 1198 - 1982 

previously rendered dry. As the spirit evaporates, a skin forms on the 
surface; the linoleum is pressed into the adhesive before the skin becomes 
too thick. The linoleum can, therefore, be spread only a few square metres 
at a time. Any excess of spirit evaporates slowly through the linoleum or is 
absorbed by the sub-floor. Gum-spirit adhesives are resistant to damp 
but are likely to be attacked by dilute alkaline solutions such as those 
that rise through wet concrete. 

A-4. BITUMEN-RUBBER EMULSIONS 

A-4.1 This type of adhesive is a dark coloured emulsion of rubber and 
bitumen or coal-tar pitch in water. There is no smell of solvent in this case. 
The water in the adhesive must evaporate before the linoleum is laid, as 
there is a risk of blistering if the linoleum absorbs the water. The evaporation 
is noted by tKe colour of the adhesive which changes from chocolate to 
black. When the colour is black, it is safe to lay the linoleum. This type of 
adhesive and the solution type described under A-5 are what may be 
called 'one-chance' adhesives; when the linoleum is placed on them it is 
fixed and cannot be slid into position. The bitumen-rubber emulsions are 
resistant to water and, when set, are water-repellent. When used as adhesives 
they should not, however, be taken to serve as damp-proof courses. 

A-5. BITUMEN-RUBBER SOLUTION 

A-5.1 Bitumen-rubber solution adhesive is dark coloured, of thick con- 
sistency and is recognizable by the strong smell of petroleum solvent. The 
solution is applied both to the back of the linoleum and to the floor and the 
solvent allowed to evaporate before the linoleum is laid. During this period, 
as a precaution against fire, the room shall be well-ventilated and no 
smoking or naked flame shall be allowed. As adhesives, they are resistant 
to water and are water-repellent but do not serve as damp-proof courses. 

APPENDIX B 

(Clam 6,3.2) 

INFORMATION ON THE LIMITATION OF DAMP-PROOF 

MATERIAL 

A. Water Proofing Materials PropertUs/Limitations 

1) Bitumen mastic laid Impervious to the transmission of 

according to IS : 1196-1978* moisture. May be used as floor 

finish or as an underlay; where 
concrete is laid direct to earth, 
an isolating membrane should be 
used. 

♦Code of practice for laying bitumen mastic flooring ( second revision ). 

12 



IS : 1198 - 1982 



B. Sandwich Membranes 

1) Bitumen Mastic 

2) Bitumen felts 



3) Hot applied bitumen 



4) Cold applied bitumen, 
bitumen rubber emulsion 



Impervious to moisture. 

When joints are properly sealed, it 
is impervious. 

When laid on a primed surface 
with suitable thickness it may be 
regarded as impervious; care 
shall be taken to avoid pin holes. 

Repeated application can form an 
impervious layer; care in work- 
manship and maintenance is 
needed. 



APPENDIX C 

(Clause 7.1.1) 

TESTS FOR DETERMINATION OF DAMPNESS OF FLOORS 

C-l. GENERAL 

C-l.l The tests as described under C-2, C-3 and C-4 shall be conducted 
to determine the dampness of floor while laying linoleum. 

C-2. RUBBER TEST 

C-2.1 Place one square metre of rubber matting and place it loosely, with 
the smooth side down, on the floor to be tested. The matting shall be left 
for twenty-four hours for ordinary floors and forty-eight hours for unusually 
smooth floors. If, after this period, on removing the matting the concrete 
shows a dark patch, it is an indication that the floor is not sufficiently dry 
to receive linoleum. 

C-3. ANHYDROUS COPPER SULPHATE TEST 

C-3.1 This test is much more rigorous than the rubber test and is thus 
more certain. Take an ordinary piece of window glass about 40 cm square, 
lay the glass on the area of the floor to be tested and mark the floor round 
the glass with pencil. Remove the glass and lay an even beading 12 mm 
thick, of well-worked putty inside the pencil line. Spread evenly one tea- 
spoonful of anhydrous copper sulphate powder inside the putty and cover 

13 



18:1198-1982 

immediately with the glass, pressing the glass firmly into the putty, so that 
the copper sulphate is kept air-tight. The copper sulphate should be white 
when it is put in position; if after six hours it has turned green or blue it is 
clear indication that the concrete is still too damp to receive linoleum. 

C-4. MOISTURE METER TEST 

C4.1 Floors may be tested for dampness by means of a pocket hygrometer 
placed in contact with the floor. The edges shall be sealed with putty if 
the floor is rough. The humidity of the enclosed air is read directly on the 
scale of the hygrometer. The air usually takes not less than the instrument 
in position overnight and take the reading in the morning. As a general 
rule, a value of 70 to 75 shall be below 80 before it can be assumed that 
the concrete above the damp-course has dried sufficiently for it to be suitable 
for the fixing of linoleum. 



14 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, (331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 7331 13 75 

♦Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 

Maniktofa, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Secto? 35-C, ( 2 18 43 

CHANDIGARH 160036 I 3 16 41 

T4124 42 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 \ 41 25 19 

1 41 29 16 
tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branch Offices: 



'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, ( 2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 \ 2 63 49 

IPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road (38 49 55 

BANGALORE 560058 J38 49 56 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 67 16 

BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 

53/5, Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 

GUWAHATI 781003 

6-8-56C L N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 10 83 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R1 4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 j 6 98 32 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 {^] ^j J| 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 

T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam /6 21 04 

TRIVANDRUM 695035 \6 21 17 

Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): 
Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205- A West High Court Road, 2 51 71 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, .1 332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 

PUNE 411005 

•Sdles Office in Calcutta is at 5 ChowrinQhee Approach, P. O. Princep 27 68 00 
Street. Calcutta 700072 

fSales Office in Bombay Is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 65 28 
Bombay 400007 

{Sales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 
Bangalore 560002 

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



