**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12257-5 (1996) : Pneumatic measurement , Part 5: Glossary 
of terms and definitions [PGD 25: Engineering Metrology] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12257 (Part 5) : 1996 
yU^y Wffi> ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

c||^c||fad WFi 

Indian Standard 
PNEUMATIC MEASUREMENT 

PART 5 GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 



ICS 01.040.27 



©BIS 1996 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1996 Price Group 5 



Engineering Metrology Sectional Committee, LM 05 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Engineering Metrology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Light Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 

The standard aims at rationalizing the terminology by choosing suitable terms so as to eliminate the 
confusion arising from the use of different terms by different manufacturers. It provides the user of 
pneumatic measurement equipment with an unambiguous means for communicating their requirements 
to manufacturers. 

This standard is one of series of Indian Standards on pneumatic measurement. The other parts of the 
published standard are: 

Part 1 Pneumatic measurement — General information on principles and methods 

Part 2 Pneumatic measurement — Design features of instruments working in high pressure range 

Part 3 Pneumatic measurement — Parameters of instruments working on high pressure 

Part 4 Pneumatic measurement — General information and examples of application 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 4358 : 1968 'Glossary of terms 
used in air gauging* published by British Standards Institution (BSI). 



IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 



Indian Standard 
PNEUMATIC MEASUREMENT 



PART 5 GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 



1 SCOPE 



This standard (Part 5) covers the various technical 
terms and definitions used in pneumatic measure- 
ment. 

2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

2.1 Pneumatic Measurement (Air Gauging) 

A precise measuring technique, using air drawn 
from a compressed air supply, which can be 
employed to measure size or, to check form or 
position. 

2.2 Pneumatic Measurement System 

Measuring equipment employing pneumatic meas- 
urement based on the determination of flow or 
pressure and comprising a pneumatic gauge unit 
and one or more measuring heads. 

2.3 Pneumatic Measurement (Flow) System 

Pneumatic measurement system based upon the 
determination of flow. 

2.4 Pneumatic Measurement (Pressure) System 

Pneumatic measurement system based upon the 
determination of pressure. 

2.5 Pneumatic Measurement Unit 

That part of the pneumatic measurement system 
which displays the measured sizes or provides visual 
or audible signals or converts the measurements 
into signals for automatic operations. 

2.6 Measuring Head 

That part of the pneumatic measurement system 
which contains the gauging element(s) and which is 
presented to the work, or vice versa. 

2.7 Gauging Element 

The element in the measuring head which detects 
dimensional change and provides the response 
which enables the pneumatic measurement system 
to measure that change. The gauging element may 
be an open jet or a contact gauging element. 

2.8 Open Jet 

A gauging element in the form of a jet of circular 
or rectangular section which does not contact the 
work being measured. The parameters of a jet are 



its internal and external diameters, when the sec- 
tion is circular; the external and internal length and 
breadth when the section is rectangular. 

2.9 Land Width 

The terminating wall thickness of an open jet. 

2.10 Jet Recession 

The amount by which an open jet is recessed behind 
the outer surface of the measuring head. 

NOTE — Recession fulfils two objects : 

a) It protects the jet from mechanical damage, and 

b) It maintains the essential minimum distance between 
the jet and the work being measured. 

2.11 Contact Gauging Element 

A gauging element fitted with a stylus which con- 
tacts the work being measured. 

2.12 Matched Gauging Elements 

Gauging elements which have matched pneumatic 
characteristics so that they may be used in com- 
bination in a single measuring circuit. 

2.13 Asymmetry Error 

The error which may arise when the work being 
measured is asymmetrically disposed between 
gauging elements which are combined in one 
measuring circuit. This is the apparent change in 
bore sizes resulting from movement of the plug 
body in the hole along the line of the jets. 

2.14 Air Escape Duct 

An air passage, for example, a groove or hole, which 
provides an easy final escape to atmosphere of air 
which has emerged from a gauging element. 

2.15 Control Orifice (Control Jet) 

The restriction used in pneumatic measurement 
(pressure) systems. In association with the gauging 
elements, the control orifice determines the mag- 
nification of the system. 

2.16 Supply Pressure 

The pressure of the supply from which the 
pneumatic measurement systems draws its air. 



1 



IS 12257 (Part5): 1996 



2.17 Air Filter 

A device for cleaning the air supply to the 
pneumatic measurement system and which, ideally, 
removes all liquid and solid particles. 



2.18 Operating Pressure 

The constant pressure at which the pneumatic 
measurement system is operated. 

2.19 Operating Pressure Indicator 

A pressure measuring instrument which registers 
the operating pressure and which is usually fitted to 
the pneumatic measurement unit. 

2.20 Pressure Regulator 

A device which keeps the operating pressure con- 
stant irrespective of pressure changes in the supply 
line and of changes of air flow in the pneumatic 
measurement system itself. 

2.21 Intermediate Pressure (Back Pressure) 

In pneumatic measurement (pressure) systems, the 
pressure between the control orifice and the 
measuring head. 

2.22 Simple Pressure Measurement 

Measurement of the intermediate pressure in rela- 
tion to the ambient atmospheric pressure or to the 
operating pressure as datum. 

2.23 Differential Pressure Measurement 

Measurement of the intermediate pressure in rela- 
tion to a pre-set fixed pressure obtained from a 
branch circuit having the same operating pressure 
as the measuring circuit. This fixed pressure is 
adjusted to be approximately equal to the inter- 
mediate pressure at the mid-point of the measuring 
range. 

2.24 Null-Balance Pressure Measurement 

Measurement of the intermediate pressure by a 
self-balancing system which brings the pressure in 
a secondary chamber to equality with the pressure 
being measured by means of a pressure regulating 
mechanism fitted with an appropriate indicating 
device. 

NOTE — The terms defined in 2.22, 2,23 and 2.24 serve to 
distinguish between the different methods currently used in 
pneumatic measurement (pressure) systems for measuring 
the intermediate pressure. 

2.25 Datum (Zero) Setting Control 

The control which enables the indicator reading to 
be set to a datum, for example, zero. 

NOTE — This control will normally be used in association 
with a setting standard. 



2.26 Magnification 

The ratio of the movement of the indicator index to 
the dimensional change which produces it, both 
being expressed in terms of the same unit of length. 

2.27 Ranging 

The process of adjusting pneumatic measurement 
system so that the movement of the indicator index 
conforms to a pre-established scale at two or more 
points, so that pneumatic measurement system has 
a specified magnification. 

2.28 Measuring Range 

The range of sizes (minimum to maximum) which 
the pneumatic measurement system is designed to 
measure and over which the indicating device is 
graduated. 

2.29 Magnification Control 

The control which enables the magnification of the 
pneumatic measurement system to be adjusted to a 
specified value. 

NOTE — Tliis control will normally te used in association 
with setting standards. 

2.30 Setting Standard 

A standard of appropriate form and of established 
size used for setting up the pneumatic measure- 
ment system so that its reading represents true size. 

NOTE — Two setting standards, one to provide a reading 
near the lower limit of the measuring range and the other a 
reading near the upper limit, enable both magnification and 
datum to be set. A single setting standard allows the datum 
to be set when ranging has already been done. 

2.31 Transducer 

A device which converts a measuring signal ex- 
pressed in terms of one physical quantity into an 
equivalent signal expressed in terms of another 
physical quantity. 

2.32 Differential Pneumatic Measurement 

A technique whereby two individual measurements 
are combined so as to display their difference on a 
single indicator. 

2.33 In-Process Gauging 

Gauging carried out during processing, for ex- 
ample, measurement of a wofkpiece whilst it is 
being machined. 

234 Post-Process Gauging 

Gauging carried out immediately after processing, 
for example, measurement of a workpiece immedi- 
ately after it has been machined. 



IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 



3 MEASURING HEADS FOR DIMENSIONAL 
MEASUREMENT 

The terms and definitions given in this clause relate 
to measuring heads used for the measurement of 
length, internal diameter and external diameter. 
The terms relating to measuring heads for inspect- 
ing form and position are given in Annex A. 

3.1 Pneumatic Measurement Probe 

A measuring head for general use fitted with a 
single gauging element which may be an open jet or 
a contact gauging element. When two or more are 
used in one measuring circuit, the gauging elements 
must be matched. 

3.2 Pneumatic Plug Gauge 

3.2.1 A plug gauge which can be inserted into the 
bore to be measured and which is fitted with one or 
more pairs of gauging elements. The gauging ele- 
ments may be open jets or contact gauging ele- 
ments. 

3.2.2 The pneumatic plug gauge is of fixed size and 
can be used to measure only diameters lying within 
its measuring range as specified by the manufac- 
turer. 

3.2.3 For the measurement of single diameter the 
pneumatic plug gauge is fitted with two gauging 
elements arranged diametrically. 

3.2.4 By rotation and translation of the plug within 
the bore, the position of the diameter measured can 
be varied both in azimuth and depth. 

3.2.5 For the measurement of average diameter, 
the pneumatic plug gauge is fitted with an even 
number of gauging elements, four or more, spaced 
equally around the circumference. 

3.3 Through-Bore Pneumatic Plug Gauge 

Pneumatic plug gauge for measuring through 
bores. Since the gauge can be passed right through 
the bore, the longitudinal position of the gauging 
elements is not of primary importance. 

3.4 Blind Bore Pneumatic Plug Gauge 

Pneumatic plug gauge for measuring blind bores. 
The gauging elements are placed so as to permit 
measurements to be made as close as possible to the 
bottom of the bore. 

3.5 Shouldered-Bore Pneumatic Plug Gauge 

Pneumatic plug gauge for measuring shouldered 
holes. The gauging elements are placed so as to 
permit measurements to be made as close as pos- 
sible to the shoulder. 



3.6 Multi-Dimension Pneumatic Plug Gauge 

Pneumatic plug gauge for the simultaneous meas- 
urement of two or more spaced diameters which 
may be of equal or of different size. 

3.7 Special Pneumatic Plug Gauge 

Pneumatic plug gauges generally conforming to the 
basic definition but particularly designed for 
specific applications 

3.8 Pneumatic Ring Gauge 

3.8.1 A ring gauge through which is passed the 
cylindrical work to be measured and which is fitted 
with one or more pairs of gauging elements. The 
gauging elements may be open jets or contact gaug- 
ing elements. 

3.8.2 The pneumatic ring gauge is of fixed size and 
can be used to measure only diameters lying within 
its measuring range as specified by the manufac- 
turer. 

3.8.3 For the measurement of single diameter the 
pneumatic ring gauge is fitted with two gauging 
elements arranged diametrically. 

3.8.4 By relative rotation and translation of the 
shaft within the ring gauge the position of the 
diameter measured can be varied both in azimuth 
and along the axis. 

3.8.5 For the measurement of average diameter 
the pneumatic ring gauge is fitted with an even 
number of gauging elements four or more, spaced 
equally around the circumference. 

3.9 Through-Shaft Pneumatic Ring Gauge 

Pneumatic ring gauge for measuring plain cylindri- 
cal work. Since the work can be passed right 
through the ring gauge the longitudinal position of 
the gauging elements is not of primary importance. 

3.10 Close-to-Shoulder Pneumatic Ring Gauge 

Pneumatic ring gauge for measuring shouldered 
shafts. The gauging elements are placed so as to 
permit measurements to be made as close as pos- 
sible to the shoulder. 

3.11 Multi-Dimension Pneumatic Ring Gauge 

Pneumatic ring gauge for the simultaneous meas- 
urement of two or more spaced diameters which 
may be of equal or different size. 

3.12 Special Pneumatic Ring Gauge 

Pneumatic ring gauges generally conforming to the 
basic definition but particularly designed for 
specific applications. 



IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 



3.13 Pneumatic Calliper Gauge 

A calliper gauge for the measurement of cylindrical 
work. It has one or two gauging elements, which 
may be open jets or contact gauging elements. 

The pneumatic calliper gauge is designed to 
measure a single diameter and cannot conveniently 
be used to measure average diameter. 

By relative rotation and translation of the gauge 
and the work, the position of the diameter 
measured can be varied both in azimuth and along 
the axis. 



3.14 Multi-Dimension Hand Pneumatic Calliper 
Gauge 

A hand pneumatic calliper gauge, normally of fixed 
size, designed for simultaneous measurement of 
two or more diameters of equal or different size. 

3.15 Special Hand Pneumatic Calliper Gauge 

Pneumatic calliper gauges for hand use conforming 
generally to the basic definition but particularly 
designed for specific applications. 



IS 12257 ( Part 5 ): 1996 



ANNEX A 
(Clause 3) 

TERMS RELATING TO MEASURING HEADS FOR INSPECTING FORM AND POSITION 




PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
2 gauging elements 1 measuring 
circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 
spaced at right angles 
2 measuring circuits 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
In gauging elements in pairs 
equally spaced in one plane n 
measuring circuits 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
3 gauging elements 1 measuring 
circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 

a) 3 gauging elements 

b) 5 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
2 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 
suitably spaced along axis 
2 measuring circuits 



IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 



10 



11 



12 



13 



14 



Variation 
of 

diameter 
along axis 



Ovality 



3-point 
Lobmg 



5-point 
Lobing 



Taper*! 



Taperf 



Variation 
of 

diameter 
along axis 










PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
2ft gauging elements in n pairs 
suitably spaced along axis n 
measuring circuits 



PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 
2 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 
3 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 

a) 3 gauging elements 

b) 5 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 
2 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 
4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 
suitably spaced along axis 
2 measuring circuits 



PNEUMATIC RING GAUGE 
2ft gauging elements suitably 
spaced along axis ft measuring 



IS 12257 (Part5): 1996 




HAND CALLIPER GAUGE 
1 or 2 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



MULTI-DIMENSION HAND- 
CALLIPER GAUGE 
2n gauging elements 
n measuring circuits 



FIXTURE MOUNTING 
PNEUMATIC CALLIPER 
GAUGE 

a) Non-floating 

b) Floating 

In gauging elements 

1 measuring circuit in each 

calliper 



VEE GAUGE 
1 gauging element 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 

4 gauging elements in common 

axial plane 

1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
4 gauging elements in common 
axial plane, centre pair disposed 
to suit component conditions 
1 measuring circuit 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
3 gauging elements in common 
axial plane 
2 measuring circuits 



IS 12257 (PartS): 1996 



22 



28 



Straight- 
ness 



Straight- 

ness 



Concen- 
tricity of 
2 inside 
diameters 



Concen- 
tricity of 
2 inside 
diameters 



i b'J'X 



rm 




PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
1 gauging element 
1 measuring circuit 





^ 






^v 



PNEUMATIC PLUG GAUGE 
1 gauging element 
1 measuring circuit 



VEE BLOCK WITH GAUG- 
ING ELEMENTS 
n gauging elements n measuring 
circuit 



4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 
measuring thickness of material 
between holes 
2 measuring circuits 



8 gauging elements in 2 sets of 
4 giving compensation for 
diameter variation 
2 measuring circuits 



1 gauging element 

2 measuring circuits 



2 gauging elements 

1 measuring circuits 

End face of component is datum 

and must be square to axis 



IS 12257 (PartS): 1996 



29 Concen- 
tricity of 
2 inside 
diameters 




4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 

giving compensation for 

diameter variation 

2 measuring circuits 

End face of component is datum 

and must be square to axis 



30 



Concentri- 
city outside 
to inside 
diameter 




2 gauging elements measuring 
material thickness 
1 measuring circuit 



31 



Squareness 
bore to 
face 




1 



2 gauging elements 
1 measuring circuit 



VL 



32 



Square- 
ness! 
bore to 
face 




I 




w 



4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 
giving compensation for 
diameter variation 
2 measuring circuit 



33 



Squareness 




Reference square with 
1 gauging element 
1 measuring cirucit 



34 



Centre 
distance 
of 2 holes 



7 - - y -. ■ y 


J-tX1 



4 gauging elements in 

2 pairs giving compensation for 

diameter variation 

2 measuring circuits 



35 



Centre 
distance 
shaft to 
hole 




4 gauging elements in 

2 pairs giving compensation for 

diameter variation 

2 measuring circuits 



IS 12257 ( Part 5 ) : 1996 



36 



37 



38 



39 



Centre 
distance 
intersecting 
holes 



Flatness 
of face 



Error in 

design 

taper 



Error in 

design 

taper 









6 gauging elements giving com- 
pensation for diameter variation 
2 measuring circuits 



Reference surface with 
1 gauging element 
1 measuring circuits 



TAPERED PNEUMATIC 
PLUG GAUGE 
4 gauging elements in 2 pairs 
2 measuring circuits 



TAPERED PNEUMATIC 
RING GAUGE 
4 cauging elements in 2 pairs 
2 measuring circuits 



N PJ h *~ Measurin g hea <is K>r inspecting for taper which are marked with an asterisk (*) may also be used to determine variation 
of diameter along with axis. Those marked with (t) should be used with necessary caution when inspecting shafts or holes in the 
rare cases in which the pattern of diameter variation relates with depth. 



10 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LM 05(0148). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 83 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

{ 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 1 323 38 41 



Eastern : 1/14 C. IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 \ 337 86 26, 337 91 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



{ 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) / 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 \ 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 

Printed at Pantograph, New Delhi (India) 



