**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 13992 (1994) : Bulk Handling Equipment - Bagging Machines 
(Electronic Type) - Design and Construction - General 
Requirements [MED 7 : Material Handling Systems and 
Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13992 : 1994 
(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 

BAGGING MACHINES ( ELECTRONIC 

TYPE) — DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION — 

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



UDC 621-798-34 



© BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 1994 Price Group 2 



Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 7 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of 
Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee and approval of the Heavy Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

This Indian Standard covers the general requirements of electronic type bagging machines. The 
requirements laid down in the Indian Standard are not withstanding the requirements of any other 
Status, Regulations, Acts and Rules or any other Central or State Governments Orders issued from 
time to time which are otherwise to be met. 

Electronic type bagging machines are taking the place of mechanical type bagging machines where 
feasible. This Indian Standard therefore, attempts to provide uniform guidelines to the purchaser 
and the supplier on the electronic type bagging machines. This standard covers a net-weigher type 
bagging machines (electronic ) suitable for filling in open mouthed and/or valve type bags. Taring 
of bags is also possible as soon as the bag is put on the machine. The data sheet necessary for 
selection and desig n of these type of bagging machine have been laid down in IS 13945:1994 
'Bulk handling equipment — Bagging machines ( Electronic type ) — Data sheet'. 

The general requirements for design and construction of mechanical type bagging machine have 
been specified in IS 13989:1994 'Bulk handling equipment — Bagging machines (Mechanical 
type ) — Design and construction — General requirements'. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following pulications 
issued by Organization Internationale De Metrologie Legale: 

OIML C 8 Non-automatic weighing instruments 

OIML R 60 Metrological Regulations for load cell 

OIML R 61 Automatic gravimetric filling machines 

OIML R 74 Electronic weighing instruments 

OIML R 87 Net content in packages 

Accuracy requirements have been specified in International Recommendation OIML R 61. 
Accuracies other than those specified in 4.6 may be adopted as per agreement between purchaser 
and the manufacturer. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2:1963 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



[S 13992 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 
BAGGING MACHINES ( ELECTRONIC 
TYPE) — DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the net-wcightcr type 
bugging machines (electronic) suitable tor bulk solid 
materials. 

1.2 The standard also covers details of the functions 
and the operating characteristics of the bagging machines 
(mechanical type). Any additional or alternate features 
may be as agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier. 

1.3 This standard generally covers the bagging 
machines used in conjunction with machines directly 
mounted on the off-take conveyors. These machines 
may also be used with carousel type conveyors etc, 
operational details of which have to be specified by 
the purchaser. 

2 REFERENCES 

Indian Standard IS 13945 : 1994 Bulk Handling 
Equipment — Bagging machines (Electronic type) — 
Data sheet for specification is a necessary adjunct to 
this standard. 

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 Design, manufacture and supply of bagging 
machines shall meet the performance requirements as 
specified by the purchaser. 

3.2 The bagging machines shall be suitable for the 
duty conditions as specified by the purchaser. 

3.3 The purchaser shall provide the information 
to the manufacturer/supplier in accordance with 
IS 13992 : 1994. 

4 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 Bagging machine shall be electronic fully load 
cell/level load cell/beam load cell type as specified 
by the purchaser comprising fully automatic basic 
weighing functions, check weighing, correction unit 
and calibration. 

4.2 Bagging machine shall be provided with either 
self optimising controller unit or microp-ocessor 
controller unit, both having provisions to hook up 
with a printer and data logger. The memory of the 
microprocessor based controller unit shall be battery 
backed up to save all programmed values in the event 
of a power failure. 



4.3 Bagging machine along with its controller unit 
shall be capable to cope with changes in material 
properties such as density and fluidity and with dust 
build up on the weigh pan without any operator's 
intervention. 

4.4 The variation in capacity of automatic weighing 
cycle of the machine shall be in suitable steps per 
hour. 

4.5 The weight of each bag and capacity of bagging 
machine in bags per hour shall be clearly indicated 
by the purchaser in his enquiry/order [see IS 13945 : 
1994] and by the manufacturer on the machine. 

4.6 The accuracy of the bagging machine shall be 
± 0.1 percent per weightment and — percent for 
any 20 consecutive bags while weighing 50 kg/25 kg 
bags or as specified by the purchaser as per the 
relevant clauses of the Weights and Measures (Packaged 
Commodity) Act. 

4.7 In case of feeder type machines, feeding of material 
to be weighed shall be done with variable speeds so 
as to achieve and maintain the sustained accuracy. 

4.8 Bagging machine housing shall be of dust tight 
construction with doors as required. The dedusting 
connections shall be provided at pre-filling spout, 
weigh hopper, etc as the case may be depending on 
the product handled. The connections shall be suitable 
for the volume of air to be vented, the value of which 
shall be indicated by supplier. 

4.9 The filling spout with bag clamping device shall 
be provided to securely hold the bags while the material 
is being discharged into the bag. The clamp closing 
and opening shall be controlled by a manual/switch 
operated device or as specified by the purchaser. 

4.10 Following features of a control module shall be 
housed in control panel: 

a) Weighment size selector 

b) Automatic compensation for 

i) inflight material, 
ii) tare compensation; and 
iii) in suspension material 

c) Automatic over/under checking (zero and full 
balance) 

d) Automatic correction (zero and full balance) 

e) Feed Mode selection 



1 



IS 13992 : 1994 

1) Dribble Iced adjustment 

g) Nell weight indicator 

h) Fault indicator 

j) Cumulative weight indicator 

k) Manual release of residue material either 
through remote operation or otherwise 

m) Release of burst bag 

4.11 Materials of construction for each part of the 
machine shall be as specified by the purchaser. If not 
specified, manufacturer shall clearly indicate material 
of construction for each part of the machine. 

4.12 The operation of bagging machine together with 
bag holder shall be entirely automatic, except for 
fixing the empty bags to bagging spout. 

4.13 The operation of the pneumatic sack grip with 
clamp closure shall be by means of switch operable 
by the knuckle. 

4.14 The operation oi^ the machine shall be electro- 
pneumatic type with electronic control of weighing 
and self optimizing/microprocessor control of net 
weighment. 

4.15 A manual switch shall be provided in control 
panel for discharging the residue material less than 
one weighment. 

4.16 Controller Unit Requirements 

Controller unit of bagging machine shall be provided 
with a printer and data logger if specified by the 
purchaser. Printer unit shall be capable of printing the 
following information as required by the purchaser: 

a) Date 

b) Time 

c) Batch and serial number 

d) Weight at each weighment (kg) 

e) Total weight for each twenty consecutive 
weighment (kg) 

f) Total weight per shift of bagging (t) 

g) Total weight per day of bagging (1) 
h) Total weight per month of bagging (t) 
j) Total weight per year of bagging (t) 

4.16.1 Compatibility of controller with purchaser's 
data logger shall be ensured if so agreed between 
purchaser and supplier 

4.17 If specified in the data sheet or if the manufac- 
turer feels necessary keeping in view the characteristics 
of the materials being handled, bagging machine shall 
be provided with a rotary agitator above inlet to break 
up any lumps or caking formed. 



4.18 Air requirement for each bagging machine at 
desired parameter shall be indicated by the manufac- 
turer. 



4.19 Control panel shall be placed at such a distance 
from the machine as specified by the purchaser. Local 
control station shall be installed on suitable supports 
near machine, within the reach of the operator. If so 
desired by the purchaser, the complete control panel 
shall be installed locally. 

4.20 Necessary interlocking circuitry shall be provided 
for anti double dumping to prevent two weighments 
being discharged in case the filled bag is left on spout 
for a period greater than the weighting time cycle. 

4.21 For installation of machine in hazardous area, 
all electrical and instrumentation shall be suitable for 
the area classification specified by the purchaser. 

5 OPERATION 

5.1 The mode of operation of bagging machine 
normally is: 

a) Clamping of bag on bagging spout — Manual 

b) Discharge of material in the bag — Automatic 

c) Residue material in the hopper — Manual 

d) Filling cycle of machine — Automatic 

5.2 It shall be ensured that no automatic discharge 
of material takes place unless the bag is clamped. 

5.3 Initiating the cycle, for clamping the bag manually, 
if all the operations of filling right upto discharge of 
bag are automatic then the operation is termed as 
semi-automatic. 

5.4 The operation of the bagging machine shall be 
such that the operator while lifting the empty bag for 
fixing to the filling spout shall simultaneously press 
with his knuckle the operating lever, after which all 
the following operations shall be automatic in their 
proper sequence: 

1) Clamping of empty bag on filling spout. 

2) Effecting discharge of pre-weighed material 
to the clamped bag. 

3) Audio visual signal for readiness of machines, 
emergency stop and discharge of weighment. 

4) Auto check weighing after: 

i) each bag 

ii) pre-set number of bags 
iii) pre-delermined time interval 

5) Auto compensation for weight correction 
after: 

i) each bag 

ii) pre-set number of bags 
iii) prc-determined time interval 



IS 13992 : 1994 



6) Auto zero taring of machine after: 

i) Each bag 

ii) Pre-set number of bags 
iii) Pre-determined time interval 

7) Provision of in-flight material correction. 

8) Remote calibration of machine from control 
panel excluding load cell. 

9) Adjustment (remote) from control panel 

i) Acceptable tolerance and dead zone 
ii) Coarse feed 
iii) Dribble icvd 

10) Display on remote control panel 

i) Set and actual tare weight 

ii) Set and actual net weight 

iii) Over weight 

iv) Under weight 

11) Mode of display digital. 

12) Fault and diagonetic indicator, provision on 
remote control panel. 

13) Air failure safety. 

14) Hook up with data logger and printer. 

15) Closing the discharge gate of weighing 
receptacle and then starting filling in of fresh 
charge of material in the weighing receptacle. 

16) Release of filled bag. 

5.5 Arrangements shall be provided for remote manual 
release of residue material or material filled in a burst 
bag. 

6 FUNCTION 

6.0 As soon as a weighing cycle is initiated, material 
feed starts in a full How rate until a preset weight is 
reached. Feed rate is then reduced and material starts 
dribbling till the preset weight is reached. Afler the 
preset weight has been collected in the hopper, the 
hopper doors open and discharge the material into the 
bag. The doors then close automatically and new- 
cycle starts. 

6.1 The entire weighing cycle is controlled and 
monitored by the control module on the basis of the 
present data and actual weight signal supplied by the 
load cells. In addition to the manual zero and full 
weight adjustments, the module — depending upon the 
options selected— shall automatically keep track of 
zero, preact ami final cut off settings. 

7 SUPPLY CONDITIONS 

7.1 Supply for bagging machines shall include the 
following. 

a) Essential Components — Bagging machine 
shall be complete in all respects and shall 
include but not be limited to the following 
essential items for each machine. 

i) Bagging machine with its accessories such 
as belt feeder or screw feeder or rotary 



feeder with two speed motor, redi ;tion 
gear box. coupling, load cell, weighing 
hopper and enclosed casing. 

ii) Pneumatically operated bag holder with 
air cylinders and all controls etc, including 
air filter, lubricating arrangement, pressure 
reducer and pressure gauge (but excluding 
air compressor and air receiver) and suitable 
flexible length of air pipe with union to 
connect purchaser air pipe line. Purchaser 
shall supply air at one point only per 
machine. 

iii) Discharge spout. 
iv) Bagging spout. 
v) Counter weights, if required, 
vi) Bolts, nuts and gaskets as required for 
connecting inlet to the surge hopper. 

vii) Foundation bolts. 

viii) Machine supporting frame with suitable 
antivibration mounting. 

ix) Bag holder. 

x) All electrical and controls including motors, 
motor control centres, push buttons, lamp, 
etc. 

xi) Proximity switches, solenoid valve, local 
control box, central control panel, junction 
boxes with glands. 

xii) Interconnecting cables. 

b) Optional Items — Bagging machine shall also 
be provided with following items which shall 
be optional and be supplied with the main 
equipment if purchaser specifies for the same 
in his order. 

i) Agitator with drive. 

ii) Microprocessor / self optimising 
controller unit. 

iii) Data logger with printer and UDC (one 
set for all the machines) mounted on a 
specially designed desk. 

iv) Redusling system. 

8 DRAWINGS AND TECHNICAL DOCUMENTS 

The complete technical specification, layout and 
sectional drawings including functional, operational 
and control features shall be furnished for the machine. 

9 INSPECTION AND TESTING 

9.1 The schedule of inspection and testing at 
manufacturer's works shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier, 

9.2 The bagging machine shall operate satisfactorily 
without undue noise, vibration or display of any 
unfavourable characteristics. 

93 For establishing the sustained capacity and accuracy 
of the bagging machine, a load test run at site under 



IS 13992 : 1994 



stabilized conditions for a minimum period of one 
hour at its rated capacity shall be conducted without 
any changes in setting of the machine. 

10 PROTECTION AND PAINTING 

10.1 The bagging machine, its sub-assemblies and 
other components shall be suitably painted. The 
machined parts shall be protected against rust with 
a rust preventing coating. 

10.2 Unless otherwise specified by purchaser, all 
structural parts shall be thoroughly cleaned and 
painted with atleast two coats of paint after a coat of 
primer. 



10.3 The bagging machine shall be properly packed 
so as to avoid any damage during transportation. 

10.4 In case the sub-assemblies or the components 
have to be packed separately, they shall have suitable 
marking to match them with the related sub-assemblies 
or the components, 

10.5 The bagging machine shall have identification 
plate showing: 

a) Manufacturer's name, 

b) Serial number and year of manufacture, 

c) Capacity, and 

d) Any other particular data as specified by 
purchaser. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. HMD 07 ( 5271 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 



137 

|37 



(331 01 31 
(331 13 75 



84 99, 37 85 61 

86 26, 37 86 62 



J53 38 43, 53 16 40 
|53 23 84 

1235 02 16, 235 04 42 
1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

J632 92 95, 632 78 58 
1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



