**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10596-2 (1983) : Code of practice for selection, 
installation, operation and maintenance of pumps for 
industrial applications, Part 2: Installation [MED 20: 
Pumps; 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



udc 621 65005 IS : 10596 ( Part 2 )v- 1983 




Indian Standard **ReaiittliM*A 19M* 1 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, (Reaffirmed 2002) 
INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 
OF PUMPS FOR INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS 

PART 2 INSTALLATION 



e 

a. 

J£ 

■a 
c 
a 



c 
o 

O 
O 
CO 

a 

£ 

Q. 



1. Scope — Lays down general guidelines for installation of pumps for industrial applications. 
1.1 This standard is not applicable to pumps for agricultural applications. 

2. Installation — In order to ensure satisfactory operation of a hydraulic pump, prime-mover or trans- 
mission, it is essential to follow the installation and operating instructions given by the manufacturer. 
Care shall be taken to see that the equipment particularly the internal parts, is kept clean during 
installation and use. The fluid to be used for cooling, sealing and lubrication should conform as 
regards quality and purity, to the manufacturer's specifications. The following general recommenda- 
tions are common to most hydraulic power pumps but specific instructions from the manufacturer should 
be carefully adhered to. Special conditions of use or operation may necessitate maintenance and 
servicing operations particular to these uses. 

2.1 Shipment— After final assembly, all flanges and exposed machined metal surfaces are cleaned of 
foreign matter and coated with an anti-corrosion compound such as grease, petroleum jelly or heavy 
oil. For the sake of protection during shipment and erection, ail pipe flanges, pipe openings and nozzles 
should be protected by flange covers or by screwed-in plugs or by plastic or rubber caps. 

2.1.1 It is a good practice to deliver the prime mover to the pump manufacturer where it can be 
assembled and aligned with the pump on a common base plate. The base plate should be drilled for 
prime mover mounting but the final doweling to be performed at the site only after final alignment. 
If possible, the unit shou-ld be shipped assembled with pump and prime mover on a common base-plate. 
In cases where prime mover are shipped directly to the site, the base plate should be drilled at the job 
site only. 

2.2 Storage at Site — The pump should be stored in a dry location if received before time. All protect- 
ing arrangements of the pump parts should be left undisturbed. The bearings and couplings shall be 
given due care to protect them from sand, grit and other foreign matter. 

Special precautions are needed if a pump is to be stored for an extended period of time. For 
extending storage of the equipment the manufacturer's instructions shall be followed. 

2.2.1 If rust preventives have been applied on stored parts, they should be removed completely 
before final installation and the bearings should be relubricated. 

2.3 Location — Location should be such that adequate accessibility for maintenance is ensured. For 
large pumps with heavy casings and rotors, a travelling crane or other facility for attaching a hoist 
should be provided on the pump location. 

2.3.1 As far as possible, location of pump should be close to the liquid source. If practicable, the 
pump centreline should be kept below the liquid level in the reservoir. 

2.4. Site inspection — Just before the start of pump installation the package containing pump shall be 
shifted to site and all materials shall be inspected for possible damage to internal parts due to prolon- 
ged storage. In case the pump shaft is not free the pump may be dis-assembled for internal inspection 
and rectification. 

2,5 Foundations — Foundation structure should be capable of offering rigid support to the full area of 
the base plate and to absorb shocks and strains which are normally expected to occur. In this regard 
concrete foundation is found most satisfactory. Although most pumping units are mounted on base 
plates, very large units may be mounted directly on the foundations by using sole plates under pump 
and prime mover feet. Misalignment is corrected by putting suitable metallic packings. 

2.5.1 Foundation surface and pockets shall be chipped in order to roughen the concrete, and levelled 
to ensure 50 mm gap between base plate and foundation surface. The centre line and elevation shall 



Adopted 30 June 1983 



October 1983, IS! 



Gr3 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10596 ( Part 2) -1983 

be marked prominently on the foundation. Anchor bolt holes shall be cleaned according to the length 
of anchor bolts. Foundation surface and anchor bolt holes shall be free from oil, rust, sand dust and 
any extraneous matter. 

Alternatively, each foundation bolt shall be surrounded by pipe sleeve, four diameters larger than 
the bolt. After pouring the concrete the pipe is held solidly in place but the bolt may be moved to 
conform to the corresponding hole in the base plate, later the space between bolt and sleeve is filled 
with grout at the time of grouting. 

2.5.2 In case a unit is mounted on steelwork or other structure it should be supported in such a way 
that the base plate cannot be distorted or the alignment disturbed by any yielding or springing of the 
structure or of the base plate. 

2.6 Alignment 

2.6.1 Place the base plate on a flat even surface and align the pump and prime mover in case the 
duly aligned set is not received. Alignment of pump and driver shaft is of extreme importance for 
trouble free mechanical operation of the unit. The following are the steps to establish the initial 
alignment of the unit : 

a) Parallel Alignment — Check the two shaft axes for their concentricity. This should be done 
with the help of straightedge or dial gauge depending upon the type of coupling and extent of 
misalignment permitted by the manufacturer of the coupling {see Fig. 1 ). 




Method I Use of Straight Edge and Feeler^Gauge 




Method II Use of Dia Gauge 
FIG. 1 PARALLEL ALIGNMENT 
2 



IS : 10596 ( Part 2) 1983 

b) Angular Alignment — Check the two shaft axes for their parallelism. This should be checked 
with the help of feeler/taper gauge or caliper or dial gauge depending upon the type of coupl- 
ing and extent of misalignment permitted by the coupling manufacturer (see Fig. 2). 




Method I Use of Feeler/Taper Gauge 




Method II Use of Caliper 




Method III Use of Dial Gauge 
FIG. 2 ANGULAR ALIGNMENT 
3 



IS: 10596 ( Part 2) -1383 

2.6.1.1 Both the above alignments should be established with the help of shims under pump or 
the prime mover. 

2.6.2 There should be a proper clearance between the faces of coupling hubs and shaft ends to avoid 
rubbing or pull on either pump or prime mover. Sufficient clearance will allow unhampered axial 
movement of the shaft of driving or driven elements to the limit of their axial clearances. 

2.6.3 In case of motors with sleeve bearings decide the axial position of shaft by actually rotating 
the motor without coupling it. Limited end float couplings should be used in cases where motors are 
with sleeve bearings. 

2.6.4 More sophisticated alignment methods such as optical instruments are to be used, particularly, 
for high speed turbine driven pumps. 

2.6.5 Place the baseplate complete with the pumping set on the foundation and support the same 
on steel strips at frequent intervals between foundation and baseplate. The steel strips should extend 
the full supporting edge of the baseplate. Level the baseplate perfectly by adjusting the thickness of 
steel strips by shimming. After levelling tighten the nuts on foundation bolts by hand. Then grout the 
base. When the grouting ( see 2.8 ) has set, gently but firmly tighten the foundation bolt nuts taking 
care not to distort the baseplate. 

2.6.6 The initial alignment should be rechecked after the suction and discharge piping have been 
bolted to the pump. Only after ensuring proper alignment at this stage, all bolts should be tightened 
finally. 

2.6.7 The alignment should be checked after a regular time interval especially when the pump handles 
hot liquid as there may be uneven strains. Pipe flanges at the pump should be disconnected after a 
period of operation to check the effect of the expansion of the piping and adjustment should be made 
to compensate for the same. 

2.7 Flushing— Pump and piping should be copiously flushed with the fluid to be used in order to 
remove all the traces of the corrosion inhibitors with which they might have been treated. 

2.8 Electrical Controls — Check that the voltage and current requirement for all electrical controls, if 
used, are compatible with the supply. 

2.9 Grouting 

2/9.1 Grouting prevents lateral movements of the pumpbase, increases its mass to reduce vibrations 
and fills in irregularities in the foundation. Normally, grout is composed of one part pure portland 
cement and two parts building sand, with sufficient water to flow freely under the base. In order to 
reduce settling, it is recommended to mix the grout and let it stand for a short period and then remix it 
thoroughly before use. If required, more water may be added. 

2.9.2 Before starting grouting work, the pumpset should be levelled properly, with the help of a spirit 
level, by adjusting the thickness of the shims and/or positions of the wedges, on which it is resting on 
the concrete foundation block. After satisfactory levelling, foundation bolts should be tightened ini- 
tially by hand. It is recommended that a frame work should be built around the pumpset base. Now 
the grout is poured until the entire space under the base is filled to the top of the underside. A stiff 
wire should be used through the grout holds to work the grout in and release air pockets. In order to 
prevent cracking due to rapid drying, the exposed surfaces of the grout should be covered by wet 
burlap. The frame work should be removed and exposed surfaces of the grout and foundations finished 
smooth only after ensuring that the grout is sufficiently set. After 72 hours or more, the hold down 
foundation bolts should be finally tightened. 

2.9.3 The foundation plate has to be rigidly secured with the foundation at the areas where the 
maximum loads of machine are resting. 

2.9.4 Usually the grout gains its full strength after 21 days. 

2.10 Doweling of Pump and Prime Mover— Doweling of both the pump and its prime mover should 
be done only after a final recheck of alignment with the coupling bolts removed and with the pump and 



IS : 10596 ( Part 2 ) -1983 

prime mover at operating temperature. This shall be done wherever applicable and when specified by 
pump manufacturer. 

2.11 Piping — The suction pipe should be as direct and short as possible. If a long suction line is 
required, the pipe size should be suitably increased to reduce friction losses excluding the case of 
boiler feed pumps. Manufacturer should be consulted in case of boiler feed pumps. If a pump has to 
lift the liquid from a lower level, the suction piping should have a continuous rise towards the pump 
avoiding high spots in the line causing the formation of air pockets. In case of a static suction head, 
the pump suction piping should slope continuously downward to the pump. 

2.11.1 It is recommended to provide an isolating valve between the pump suction branch and the 
suction pipe in case of positive suction head, so that when necessary, suction pipe can be isolated 
from the pump by closing the suction side isolating valve when the pump is not in operation. Under 
no circumstances this isolating valve should be throttled for controlling the flow when the pump is in 
operation. 

2.11.2 A pump should be provided with a check valve and a discharge valve in the discharge line. 
The check valve is placed between the pump and discharge valve to check reverse flow in the event of 
unexpected prime mover failure or from reverse flow from another operating pump. The discharge 
valve is used when pump is to be primed or shut down for inspection and repairs. Suitable arrange- 
ment should be made in cases where it is difficult to operate the discharge valve manually. 

2.12 Suction Strainer — Proper suction strainers are required in the suction lines of pumps not specially 
designed to handle foreign matter as large particles may close the pump, reduce the capacity or render 
it altogether incapable of pumping whereas small particles of foreign matter may cause damage by 
lodging between close running clearances. The size of the mesh for the strainer is generally recom- 
mended by the pump manufacturer. 

2.13 Venting and Draining — Vent valves provide a means of escape for air or vapour trapped in the 
casing and should be installed at high points of the pump-casing waterways according to the recom- 
mendations of pump manufacturer. These valves are used during the priming of the pump or during 
operation if the pump should become air- or varpour-bound. Normally vented air or varpours are allow- 
ed to escape into the surrounding atmosphere except for the cases when pumps are handling inflamm- 
able or toxic or corrosive fluids. In such cases vents should be connected in such a way that they 
endanger neither the operating personnel nor the installation. The suction vents of pumps taking 
liquids from closed vessels under vacuum should be piped to the source of the suction above the liquid 
level. 

2.13.1 If the drains are considered worth reclaiming, ail the drain and drip connections should be 
piped to a point where it can be collected for reuse. 

2.13.2 Venting is not necessary if the pump is self-venting type. 

2.14 Relief Valves — The pressure developed in a positive discharge pump may exceed maximum 
design pressure. To protect these pumps against excessive pressure when the discharge is throttled or 
shut off, a pressure relief valve should be installed. Unless operation against a closed discharge is 
both in frequent and of very short duration, a relief valve with an external return connection should be 
used and the liquid from the relief valve may be piped back to the source of supply. 

2.15 Surge Chambers — In many cases reciprocating pump installations require surge chambers when 
the suction or discharge lines are of considerable length, when there is an appreciable static head on 
the discharge, when the liquid to be pumped is hot, or when it is required to smooth out variations in . 
the discharge flow. Centrifugal pumps, generally, do not require surge chambers. The type, size and 
arrangement of the surge chamber should be chosen on the basis of the manufacturer's recommenda- 
tions. 

2.16 Piping Strains— Piping should be such that they should not impose excessive forces and mo- 
ments on the pump to which it is connected, since these might spring the pump or pull it out of the 
position. Piping flanges shall be brought squarely together before the bolts are tightened. The 
suction and discharge piping and all valves, strainers, etc, should be supported and anchored near to 
but independent of the pump, so that no strain will be transmitted to the pump casing. 

Allowable forces and moments on pump flanges should be considered while deciding the fixing 
layout and supports for the pipes. 



IS : 10596 ( Part 2) -1983 

2.17 Expansion Joints — These are used in the suction and discharge piping to avoid transmitting any 
piping strains resulting from expansion when handling hot liquids, or by misalignment. Expansion 
joints may be formed by looping a pipe. Generally they are of the slip-joint or corrugated-diaphram 
type. However, they transmit to the pump a force equal to the area of the expansion joint times the 
pressure in the pipe. These forces can be of very significant magnitude, and it is impractical to design 
the pump casings, base plates, etc, to withstand such forces. When expansion joints are used, a 
suitable pipe anchor shall be instatled between it and the pump proper. Alternately, the bars can be 
used to prevent the forces from being transmitted to the pump. 

2.18 Warm-up Piping — In some specific cases it becomes necessary for a pump to come up to the 
operating temperature before it is started. In such cases provision should be made for a warm-up flow 
to pass through the pump. There may be a number of arrangements used to accomplish this. The 
pump manufacturer's recommendations should be sought in all cases as to the best means to provide 
an adequate warm-up procedure. 

2.19 instrumentation — A number of instruments are needed to have a check on the performance and 
condition of pump. A compound pressure gauge should be connected to the suction of the pump, and 
a pressure gauge should be connected to Its discharge at the pressure taps which may be provided in 
the suction and discharge flanges. The location of the gauges should be such that they can be easily 
observed. 

2.19.1 Depending upon the criticality of the installation a flowmeter may be installed supplemented 
by recording attachments. 

2.19.2 Apart from these, pumps may have additional instrumentation such as speed indicators, 
vibration monitors, bearing or casing temperature indicators, etc. 

A block/isolation valve shall be installed in each instrument and gauge glass take off connection 
and shall be located as close to the line, vessel or pump as possible. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard lays down the broad guidelines pertaining to selection, installation, operation and 
maintenance of pumps for industrial application. 

This standard is being issued in the following four parts for easy reference : 

Part 1 Selection 
Part 2 Installation 
Part 3 Operation 
Part 4 Maintenance 



Printed at Printrdde, New Delhi, India 



