**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12966-1 (1992) : Code of practice for galleries and other 
openings in dams, Part 1: General requirements [WRD 9: Dams 
and Spillways] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12966 ( Parti ) :1992 

jv ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

srfsff 3 *£faf sfk sp^t ^prrf ^t ft% ^ff^rr 

^rmi smro stfsnq 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR GALLERIES AND 
OTHER OPENINGS IN DAMS 

PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

UDC 6278247 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 1992 Price Group 2 



Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee, RVD 9 



FOREWORD 

This standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the River 
Valley Division Council. 

A large number of galleries and other openings are provided in all gravity dams for different 
purposes. 

Other openings include all types of sluices, penstock openings, shafts, adits and chambers, stair/lift 
wells, drainage holes, air vents, conduits, formed drains, porous concrete drains, etc. 

The structural design of such galleries and other opening provided in gravity dams is covered in 
IS 12S66 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 'Code of practice for galleries and other openings in dams : Part 2 
Structural design'. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



IS 12966 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR GALLERIES AND 
OTHER OPENINGS IN DAMS 



PARTI GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard (Part 1 ) covers the general 
requirements for which galleries and other 
openings are provided in gravity dams. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 Thefollowing Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

10135 : 1985 Code of practice for drainage 
system for gravity dams, 
their foundations and abut- 
ments (first revision ) 

11485 : 1985 Criteria for hydraulic design 
of sluices in concrete and 
masonry dams 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this 
following definitions shall apply. 



3.5 Drainage Gallery 

This is a supplementary gallery sometimes 
provided downstream at about 2/3rd the base 
width from the upstream face for the purpose of 
draining the downstream portion of the founda- 
tion. 

3.6 Gate Gallery 

Gallery, made in a dam to provide access to 
and room for, the mechanical and electrical 
equipment required for the operation of gates in 
outlet conduits, penstocks, etc. 

3.7 Inspection Gallery 

Gallery made in a dam to provide access to the 
interior mass of the dam in order to inspect the 
structure and study the structural behaviour of 
the dam after completion. Foundation, drainage 
gate and grouting galleries also serve as 
inspection galleries. 



standard the 4 PURPOSE 



3.1 Gallery 

The gallery is an opening within dam which 
provides access into or through the dam. 

3.2 Adit 

A horizontal gallery connecting the gallery 
system in the dam with downstream face or 
features outside the dam such as power house or 
gate house. Also called 'Access Gallery' or 
'Entrance Gallery'. 

3.3 Chamber 

When a gallery is enlarged to permit installation 
of equipment, it is called a chamber, e.g. hoist 
chamber, gate chamber, etc. 

3.4 Foundation Gallery 

It is a gallery which generally extends over the 
length of the dam near the rock profile 
conforming in elevation to the transverse profile 
of the canyon; in plan, it is near and parallel to 
the axis of the dam. From this gallery, holes 
are drilled and grouted for the main grout 
curtain and drainage holes are drilled for draining 
water seeping through the foundation in order 
to provide relief in uplift pressures. 



4.1 The need for galleries varies from dam to 
dam. Some of the common purpose for which 
galleries are provided are as follows: 

a) To provide drainage way for water seeping 
through the upstream face of the dam and 
from the foundations; 

b) To provide space for drilling holes and 
grouting the foundation in order to 
provide a grout curtain; 

c) To provide access to the interior of the 
dam for observing its behaviour after 
completion; 

d) To provide access to chambers like hoist 
chamber, pump chamber, pump well, 
instrument niches, etc; 

e) Visitors gallery to provide access routes 
for visitors. 

4.2 In addition to galleries other openings are 
also provided in dams for different purposes. 

5 LOCATION AND SIZE OF COMMON 
GALLERIES AND OPENINGS 

5.3 Foundation Gallery 

This gallery should be provided in the body of 
the dam where height of the dam above normal 
foundation level is more than 10 m (measured 



1 



IS 12966 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 

up to to crest level in case of overflow portion 
of the dam). For lesser heads, its necessity 
should be left to the discretion of the designer. 
The purpose of this gallery i$ defined in 3.4, 
4.1( a ) # 4.1( b ). The minimum size of 
gallery should be l'5m X 2'25 m, however a 
larger size cf 2*0 m X 2'5 m can be provided to 
accommodate drilling equipment. The general 
details of this gallery are given in IS 10135: 1985. 
It should be located at a distance of 3*0 metres 
or 5 percent of the reseivoir head ( measured 
from FRL to the foundation level) from the 
upstream fece of the dam, whichever is greater 
ard consistent with any other requirement. 
There should be minimum 1*5 metie concrete 
cover between the floor of the gallery and the 
foundation grade. Sometimes, depending upon 
the foundation grade profile an.d other considera- 
tions like the height of the dam from fourdation 
grade up to the spillway crest in respect of over- 
flow section, gallery disposition in other blocks, 
etc, a fcurdatior gallery may have to be located 
in a trench ( see Fig. 1 ). A minimum corcrete 
cover of atout 2*0 metres is generally provided 
in the trench. 

5.1.1 Downstream Drcincge Gcllery 

In high dams ( greater than 100 m), a supple- 
mentary diainsge galleiy is scmtimes provided 
at atout 2/3rd the base width from the upstream 
fece for diainirg the downstream portion of the 
foundation, if the tail water levels are high. The 
size of this gallery should, usually be 20 m X 
2*5 m. 

5*2 Inspection Galleries at Higher Levels Above 
Foundation Gallery 

An inspection galleiy should be provided atove 
tie fcurdation gallery so as to be about 
7 C metres below the spillway crest consistent 
with stiuctural consideration in case of overflow 
sections tavirg a height of about 25 metres or 
more measured from the spillway crest to the 
fcurdation giade to as to facilitate clefnirg/ 
reamirg cf the fcrmed/forcus concrete drains 
in the tody of the dim ( see Fig. 2 ). Geneially 
inteimediate inspection galleries should be 
provided at every 30 iretrcs intervals ( ref 
Fig. 3). The size of these galkries should 
geneially be 1'5 m X 2T5 m ( rect£ri£u!ar ). 



5.3 GM* Galleries and Chambers 

Their size should depend 'upon the size of the 
gates, etc. However IS 11485 ; 1985 may also 
be referred to for their sizing. 

5.4 Instrumentation Gallery 

The number and location of such galleries 
should depend upon the extent of instrumen- 
tation provided in a dam. These galleries should 
generally be aligned perpendicular to the dam 
axis in plan. The size is generally l'SCm X 2'25m 
( rectangular )with minor modification necessary 
for instruments like plumb-line, etc. 

5.5 Sump Well 

They should be provided in the deepest location. 
Their rumber and size should depend upon the 
quantity of water seeping through the founda- 
tions and body of the dam. The seepage water 
collected in upstream inspection galleries 
provided at higher levels should, as far as 
possible be drained-off towards the downstream 
side by gravity through adits/any other suitable 
arrangements. Sump well may also be located 
outside the dam. In this case, sump pit provision 
and a cast iron pipe of6C0mm diameter will 
have to be provided from sump pit to sump well. 
A pump house may be housed above the sump 
well. This is convenient to avoid flooding of 
water in the gallery in case pumps get failed due 
to power failure or some other cause. 

5.6 Pump Chamber 

Pumps of suitable capacity should be provided 
to pump-off the water collected in the sump well. 
As far as possible, the pumps should be located 
in a chamber adjacent to an inspection gallery 
above the foundation gallery so that in the con- 
tingency of the foundation gallery getting flood- 
ed, the pump-chsmber remains approachable 
( see Fig. 2 ). 

5.7 Elevator Tower and Shaft 

Elevator towers should generally be provided at 
the end of spillway portion in the MOF blocks 
to provide access to the galleries from top of the 
d?m. Generally, only a lift well should be 
provided for which a size of 3 m X 3 m should 
noimally suffice. Sometimes, a stair-well may 



{1500X2 250 min FOUNDATION GALLERY 

ACCEPTABLE FOUNDATION GRADE 




mm.2' 



Fig. 1 Foundation Gallery in Trench 

2 



TS J2966(Part 1 ) : 1992 



CREST EL 



INSPECTION GALLERY 
(1500X2 250 mm) 



INSPECTION GALLERY 
(1500X2 250 mm) 



AXIS OF DAM 



FOUN0AT1ON GALLERY 
(1500X2 250 mm min) 




SPILLWAY PtER 



\\- DELIVERY PIPE (EXIT ABOVE UPPER NAPPE) 



OPENING FOR SUCTION PIPES 



///* tt/$ 




SUMP WELL 

> ACCEPTABLE FOUNDATION GRADE 
<? ■» ■■-= J7£777 



»$W 



Fig. 2 Location of Foundation and Inspection Galleries in Over Flow Section 



also be provided either separately or around the 
lift well, if considered necessary. The size of 
elevator tower should accordingly be modified to 
include a stair-case. 

5.8 Ventilation Shaft/Pipes 

Generally, 300 mm diameter ventilation pipes/ 
holes should be provided in every alternate dam 
blocks from the galleries for ventilation. How- 
ever, where adits are not provided, ventilation 
shafts ( about 1 m diameter ) may be provided, 
one each near either end of the gallery to 
maintain a draft of air. However in case of 
lengthy dams, intermediate ventilation shafts 
may also be provided. 

5.9 Formed Drain 

These drains should be located as per IS 10135 : 
1985. They are spaced at approximately 3 m 
centres along the axis of the dam. The size of 
the drains is about 200 mm diameter. The lower 
ends of the drains extend to the gallery, or are 
connected to the downstream face near the fillet 
through a horizontal drain pipe or header system 
if there are no galleries. The tops of the drains 
( in OF section ) are located about 1 m below 
the crest level. In NOF section, the tops are 
located at road level ( see Fig. 2 and 3 ). 

6 MISCELLANEOUS DETAILS ABOUT 
GALLERIES 



6.1 General 

Depending upon the 



rock profile and other 



conditions, a gallery can be either horizontal or 
on a slope. In the later case, steps with tread 
250 mm and riser 200 mm may be provided. 
Generally, 25 steps should be provided in one 
flight. Hand railing along stairs should also be 
provided. It should normally be ensured that the 
steps do not cross the contraction joints between 
the two adjacent dam monoliths. Generally 
minimum horizontal length of about 1 '0- 1 '5 metres 
should be kept in the gallery adjacent to the 
^contraction joints before it is stepped. 

6.2 All galleries should have gutters to carry 
away seepage water which gets collected into the 
gallery. On horizontal runs, the depth of the 
gutter may vary from 225 mm to 375 mm to 
provide a drainage slope. A slope not flatter 
than 1 in 1000 should be provided for drainage. 

6.3 Ramps can also be provided up to 10° angles 
with the horizontal. However, for slopes more 
than 10° and up to 15° special non-slip surfaces 
should be necessary. Hand rails should also be 
provided on ramps. 

6.4 In case of very steep abutments where it is 
not possible to follow the canyon shape by the 
sloping galleries ( with steps ) vertical shafts of 
about 2*0-2*5 m diameter with spiral staircase 
( metallic ) may be provided to connect galleries 
at two levels. 

6.5 Adits to galleries should be provided for 
approaching them from downstream side of the 
NOF dam at suitable elevation above the tail 
water level. 



IS 12966 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 



M. W. L 
F.RL 

INSPECTION GALLERY 
( 1 500 X 2 250 mm) 



FORMED DRAINS 



INTERMEDIATE INSPECTION 
GALLERY (1 500 X 2 250 mm) 



AXIS OF DAM 

FOUNDATION GALLERY 
( 1500 * 2250 mm) 
nttn. 




-nun. 1500 mm 



Fig. 3 Location of Intermediate Inspection Gallery in Non-Overflow Section 



6.6 Other requirements like shock proof, lighting 
throughout galleries and adit, grilled door near 
adit entrance to prevent nuisance of birds like 
bats, fool-proof surface drainage near adit 
entrance to prevent accidental rusting of rain 
water by landslide, chocking of catch water 
drains, etc, and marking R.D. figures on the 



wall of the galleries to be attended to. 

6.7 Where separate instrumentation galleries are 
not provided in the dams of low height, provision 
may be made for accelograph inverted plump 
bobs, etc, by leaving suitable space ( say 5 m ) in 
the foundation gallery itself. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. RVD 9 ( 4340 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 0216 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



