**************** 


w^z 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live' 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


IS  10820-2  (1996)  :  Methods  of  measurement  for  radio 
equipment  used  in  the  mobile  services,  Part  2:  Transmitters 
employing  A3E,  F3E  or  G3E  emissions  [LITD  12:  Transmitting 
Equipment  for  Radio  Communication] 


S^i  ii  fc^K^y  / 1  /ua5a>N^s=a  is^m¥segs 


2^U  l»>%55^^>^!^ 


^^cvvv^w 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
'Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge'' 


VZS\: 


,  10- 


nvs1^"?^- 


;i#* 


«* 


T^ 


^ 


.^ 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


gi^p^g 


**************** 


BLANK  PAGE 


**n±rr 


u*> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
I  EC  489-2  (1991) 

( Reaffirmed  2001  ) 


Jifci*ftcH  ^naif  ^r  wfm"  ^  fen?  ^fotfr  ot^rI  gSt 

*TFT  2  ^T^M  sJhH^cN    -  T^,  1^1  3T8^T  vift3#  ^rfTuN 

(  WcTT  ZFfft&W) 


Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  FOR  RADIO  EQUIPMENT 

USED  IN  THE  MOBILE  SERVICES 

PART  2  TRANSMITTERS  EMPLOYING  A3E,  F3E  OR  G3E  EMISSIONS 

(First  Revision) 

ICS  33.060.50 


©BIS  1996 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

August  1996  Price  Group    14 


Radio  Communications  Sectional  Committee,  LTD  20 


CONTENTS 

Section  One  — General,  Supplementary  Definitions  and  Conditions 
of  Measurement 


Clause 


1.  Scope  

2.  Object 

3.  Supplementary  terms  and  definitions. 

4.  Standard  test  conditions 

5.  Supplementary  test  conditions  ... 

6.  Characteristics  of  the  measuring  equipment 

Section  Two  —  Methods  of  Measurement 

7.  Frequency  error  

8.  Terminal  radio-frequency  power 

9.  Radiated  radio-frequency  power 

10.  Input  power  and  overall  efficiency 

1 1 .  Inter-transmitter  intermodulation 

12.  Modulation  characteristic    .... 

13.  Total  distortion  factor  (of  a  sine-wave  at  audio  frequencies) 

14.  Relative  audio-frequency  intermodulation  product  level 
i5.  Modulation  iimiting 

16.  Residual  modulation  (due  to  hum  and  noise) ... 

17.  Transmitter  attack  time 

18.  Transmitter  performance  under  conditions  deviating  from  standard  test  conditions 


Page 

1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
4 


4 

4 

14 

26 

26 

28 

30 

3  0 

3  I 

32 

34 

34 


Appendix  A — Recommended  characteristics  of  the  measuring  equipment      ...  ...  ...  36 

Appendix  B  — Guide  for  the  construction  of  a  30  m  radiation  test  site  for  equipment  emitting  radio 
frequency  electromagnetic  energy    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  41 

Addrvjimv    C Fvnmnlp  nf  a  mainc  rwaipr  linp  imncrfanrf  ctahilivcilinii  r\M^\ir\rV  A  A 

•  —  "■ ~-         — -~ — r-~  —  —  —••— i»w"~- ..-..r———-.».».  „™«. .«.«...«...  ..v...,^,....  ...  ...  ■  , 

Appendix  D  — Guide  for  the  construction  of  a  3  m  radiation  test  site  for  measurements  above  100 
MHz  of  equipment  emitting  radio-frequency  electromagnetic  energy   ...  47 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Part  2)  (  First  Revision  )  which  is  identical  with  IEC  Pub  489-2  (1991)  'Methods  of 
measurement  for  radio  equipment  used  in  the  mobile  services  :  Part  2  Transmitters  employing  A3E,  F3E  or  G3E 
emissions',  issued  by  the  International  Electrotechnical  Commission  (IEC),  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  on  the  recommendation  of  Radio  Communications  Sectional  Committee,  LTD  20  and  approval  of  the 
Electronics  and  Telecommunication  Division  Council. 

This  standard  was  originally  published  in  1 984  and  was  largely  based  on  IEC  489-2(  1 978).  Consequent  upon  the 
revision  of  IEC  489-2(1978)  as  IEC  489-2(1991),  this  standard  is  now  being  revised  to  align  it  with  IEC  489-2 


(  Continued  on  third  cover  pa[>e  ) 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 


Indian  Standard 

METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT  FOR  RADIO  EQUIPMENT 

USED  IN  THE  MOBILE  SERVICES 

PART  2  TRANSMITTERS  EMPLOYING  A3E,  F3E  OR  G3E  EMISSIONS 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1.  Scope 

This  standard  refers  specifically  to  mobile  radio  transmitters  having  audio-frequency 
bandwidths  generally  not  exceeding  10  kHz  for  the  transmission  of  voice  and  other  types  of 
signals,  using: 

a)  angle  modulation  (phase/frequency  modulation),  or 

b)  double-sideband  amplitude  modulation  with  full  carrier. 

This  standard  is  intended  to  be  used  in  conjunction  with  IEC  489-1.  The  supplementary 
terms  and  definitions  and  the  conditions  of  measurement  set  forth  in  this  standard  are 
intended  for  type  tests  and  may  be  used  also  for  acceptance  tests. 

2.  Object 

The  object  of  this  standard  is  to  standardize  the  definitions,  the  conditions  and  the  methods 
of  measurement  used  to  ascertain  the  performance  of  transmitters  within  the  scope  of  this 
standard  and  to  make  possible  a  meaningful  comparison  of  the  results  of  measurements  made 
by  different  observers  and  on  different  equipment. 


3 .     Supplementary  terms  and  definitions 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  supplementary  definitions  apply. 

3. 1  Input  simulation  network  (see  figure  1 ,  page  8) 

A  weighting  network  which  modifies  the  characteristics  of  an  audio-frequency  generator  so 
that  it  simulates  the  amplitude/frequency  characteristics  of  a  device  which  produces  an 
electrical  input  signal  as  a  result  of  a  physical  change. 

3.2  Rated  radio-frequency  output  power 

The  power  specified  by  the  manufacturer  which,  under  specified  conditions  of  operation, 
should  be  available  at  the  transmitter  output  terminals  when  the  latter  are  connected  to  a 
specified  load. 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2  (  1991  ) 


Gi 


M/C 


2 

-o- 


Legend 

Gi,G2  -  audio-frequency  generators 

M/C     -  matching  or  combining  network  (where  required) 

S  -  input  arrangement 

T  ~  transmitter  under  test 

Note.  —  S  may  be  a  simulation  network  (see  3.1),  an  impedance  matching  network,  through  connection,  or  any 
other  specified  network. 

Fig.  1.  —  Input-signal  measuring  arrangement. 


3.3     Modulation  depth 

For  double-sided  amplitude  modulation,  the  modulation  depth,  in  percent,  is  given  by  the 
following: 

(  'max         Mmin.) 


modulation  depth 


x  100% 


(,  'max    ■     ' min) 
where: 

Kn«  is  the  peak-to-peak  voltage  at  the  crest  of  modulation 
Vmm  is  the  peak-to-peak  voltage  at  the  valley  of  modulation 

3.4     Maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation 

The  value  to  which  the  peak  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  shall  be  limited  by  an  agreed 
convention  for  a  particular  class  of  service. 

4.    Standard  test  conditions 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  measurements  shall  be  performed  under  the  general  test 
conditions  stated  in  I  EC  489-1  and  the  supplementary  test  conditions  given  hereafter. 


5.     Supplementary  test  conditions 

5.1     Input-signal  arrangements,  modulation  limiting  and  pre-emphasis  for  transmitters  having 
accessible  antenna  terminals 

5.1.1      Input-signal  source 

The  input-signal  source  shall  consist  of  one  or  more  audio-frequency  generators  connected 
to  the  transmitter  input  terminals  as  shown  in  figure  1. 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2  ( 1991  ) 

5. 1 .2  Input-signal  voltage 

The  audio-frequency  input-signal  voltage  is  the  voltage  across  terminals  1  and  2  of  the 
arrangement  shown  in  figure  1.  The  input-signal  voltage  should  be  expressed  in  terms  Of  the 
individual  voltages  of  this  signal. 

5. 1 .3  Standard  test  modulation 

The  modulation  due  to  a  sinusoidal  input  signal  of  1000  Hz  at  a  level  to  produce: 

—  a  modulation  depth  of  60%; 

—  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation. 

5. 1 .4  Standard  input-signal  voltage 

The  input  voltage  required  to  produce  the  standard  test  modulation. 

5. 1 .5  Modulation  limiting 

The  modulation  limiter,  if  present,  shall  be  adjusted  for  normal  operation  unless  otherwise 
specified. 

5. 1 .6  Pre-emphasis 

Pre-emphasis  networks,  if  included  in  the  transmitter,  shall  be  operative  unless  otherwise 
specified. 

5.2  Output-signal  measuring  arrangements  for  transmitters  having  accessible  antenna  terminals 

Note.  —   In  this  standard,  the  term  "antenna"  is  synonymous  with  "aerial". 

5.2.1  Test  load 

A  non-radiating  load,  with  an  impedance  and  power  rating  specified  by  the  transmitter 
manufacturer,  to  replace  the  antenna  including  any  associated  transmission  line  when  the 
transmitter  is  being  tested. 

5.2.2  Connections  to  the  measuring  equipment 

Care  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  measuring  equipment  and  any  coupling  devices  do 
not  adversely  affect  the  transmitter  loading  conditions. 

5.3  Output-signal  measuring  arrangements  for  transmitters  without  accessible  antenna  terminals 

The  test  load  shall  be  the  antenna  supplied  by  the  manufacturer.  For  absolute  measure- 
ments, a  test  site  equipped  with  radiation  measurement  instruments  shall  be  used. 

For  relative  measurements,  a  radiation  coupling  system,  for  example  a  coupling  device 
having  stable  characteristics  over  the  range  of  measurement  frequencies,  shall  be  used.  In  this 
case,  the  output  terminals  of  the  coupling  device  shall  be  treated  as  the  output  terminals  of  the 
transmitter. 

5.4  Limitation  of  the  measuring  audio-frequency  band 

Because  some  properties,  for  example  noise  and  audio-frequency  harmonic  distortion, 
depend  upon  the  audio-frequency  bandwidth  of  the  test  equipment,  reproducible  results  can 
be  obtained  only  when  the  band  of  audio-frequencies  occupied  by  the  demodulated  signal  is 
restricted  to  specified  limits. 

This  restriction  may  be  accomplished  by  means  of  a  band-limiting  filter  preceding  any 
audio-frequency  measuring  device.  The  filter  may  be  incorporated  within  the  measuring 
equipment.  When  measuring  residual  hum  and  noise,  only  the  low-pass  portion  of  the  filter 
need  be  specifieu. 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

6.     Characteristics  of  the  measuring  equipment 

Recommended  characteristics  of  the  measuring  equipment  are  given  in  appendix  A. 


SECTION  TWO  -  METHODS  OF  MEASUREMENT 

7.  Frequency  error 

7.1  Definition 

Frequency  error  is  the  difference  between  the  unmodulated  carrier  frequency  and  the 
assigned  frequency.  The  frequency  error  is  expressed  in  parts  per  106  or  in  hertz.  For  the 
purpose  of  this  measurement,  the  assigned  frequency  is  any  one  of  the  nominal  frequencies. 

Note.  —  This  definition  is  in  conformity  with  the  general  definition  of  frequency  error  in  section  two  of  IEC  244-1. 
Assigned  frequency  is  defined  in  the  International  Telecommunication  Unions  (ITU)  Radio  Regulations. 

7.2  Method  of  measurement 

The  frequency  error  is  determined  by  measuring  the  carrier  frequency  in  the  absence  of 
modulation. 

The  carrier  frequency  may  be  measured  with  any  suitable  measuring  device  with  an 
accuracy  that  is  at  least  ten  times  more  precise  than  the  frequency  tolerance  given  in  the 
equipment  specification. 

If  required,  the  measurements  may  be  repeated  on  each  channel  for  which  the  transmitter  is 
equipped  to  operate. 

8.  Terminal  radio-frequency  power 

This  clause  is  applicable  to  transmitters  equipped  with  suitable  antenna  terminals. 

8.1      General 

The  terminal  radio-frequency  output  power  of  a  transmitter  may  contain: 

—  a  carrier  component  (see  8.2); 

—  modulation  components  determining  transmission  quality  (see  clauses  12, 13  and  14); 

—  other  modulation  components,  for  example  those  contributing  to  the  adjacent  channel 
power  (see  8.5); 

—  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  components  (see  8.3); 

—  noise,  both  inside  the  band  (see  clause  16)  and  outside,  where  it  is  called  spurious 
transmitter  noise  (see  8.4),  and 

—  inter-transmitter  intermodulation  products  (see  clause  1 1). 

Measurements  are  normally  made  at  the  antenna  terminals.  Additional  measurements  may 
be  made  at  the  audio,  control  and  power  terminals  using  specified  terminations. 


IS   10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 

8.2  Carrier  power 

8.2.1  Definition 

The  average  power  supplied  to  a  transmission  line  by  a  transmitter  during  one  radio- 
frequency  cycle  in  the  absence  of  modulation. 

Note.  —  This  definition  is  in  conformity  with  that  given  in  the  ITU  Radio  Regulations.  In  this  standard,  the 
transmission  line  may  be  replaced  by  a  test  load. 

8.2.2  Method  of  measurement 

Measure  the  output  power  in  the  absence  of  modulation.  Any  convenient  method  which 
gives  an  accuracy  of  at  least  ±  10%  may  be  used. 

If  required,  the- measurement  may  be  repeated  on  each  channel  for  which  the  transmitter  is 
equipped  to  operate. 

8.3  Spurious  narrow-bandwidth  radio-frequency  components 

8.3.1  Definition 

Spurious  narrow-bandwidth  radio-frequency  components  include  harmonic  and 
non-harmonic  components  and  parasitic  components  that  are  usually  characterized  by  a 
signal  having  a  dominant  component  at  a  discrete  frequency  or  in  a  narrow  band  of  freq- 
uencies. 

Components  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  necessary  band,  which  are  the  result  of  the 
modulation  process  for  the  transmission  of  information,  are  excluded. 

8.3.2  Method  of  measurement  at  the  antenna  terminals 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  2,  page  12. 

b)  With  the  transmitter  operating  at  the  carrier  power  level  measured  in  8.2,  adjust  the 
frequency  of  the  selective  voltmeter  (10)  to  the  transmitter  carrier  frequency  and  adjust  the 
band-rejection  filter  (8)  to  produce  a  minimum  deflection  of  the  selective  voltmeter. 

c)  Adjust  the  frequency  of  the  selective  voltmeter  to  the  first  spurious  narrow-bandwidth 
component.  Record  the  frequency  and  the  deflection  of  the  selective  voltmeter. 

d)  Repeat  the  measurements  for  each  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  component  in  the  specified 
frequency  range. 

Calibration  procedure 

If  the  absolute  power  level  of  each  of  these  spurious  emissions  needs  to  be  known, 

calibrate  each  deflection  as  follows: 

e)  Replace  the  transmitter  by  the  auxiliary  generator  (2)  at  point  (Pi)  and  adjust  it  to  operate 
successively  at  the  centre  frequency  of  each  of  the  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  compo- 
nents. At  each  frequency,  adjust  the  auxiliary  generator  output  and  the  scale  of  the 
selective  voltmeter,  as  necessary,  to  obtain  the  same  deflection  as  recorded  in  steps  c)  and 
d)  or  a  known  ratio  thereof.  Record  this  ratio,  the  generator  output  voltage,  the  scale 
change  and  the  input  impedance  of  the  measuring  arrangement. 

f)  Calculate  the  power  of  the  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  radio- frequency  component  from 
the  values  recorded  in  step  e). 


IS   10820(Part2):1996 
ISO'  489-2  { 1991  ) 


Power  mains 

control  lines 

or 

audio  line 


I     dB      I 
7 1 „ J 


U 


r— — i 
^  l 

|      ^     I 
8l_, J 


X 


«r— 


P2 


r— — i 

I     dB    ' 

1  dB  I 

9  l__l 


10 


0 


Impend 

1  —  transmitter  under  test 

2  —  radio-frequency  signal  generator 

3  -   power  mains,  control  lines,  or  audio  line  terminals 

4  «   line-stabilization  network 

5  -  test  load 

6  -=  coupling  device  (may  be  incorporated  in  the  test  load) 

7  -  isolating  pad  (may  be  incorporated  in  the  test  load) 

8  -  band-rejection  filter  (if  needed) 

9  —  isolating  pad  (if  needed) 
10  -  selective  voltmeter 

Note.  —  The  standing  wave  ratio  presented  by  the  test  arrangement  at  point  (PI)  should  not  exceed  1.4  for  any 
frequency  of  the  spurious  component  concerned. 


Fig.  2.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  terminal  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  radio-frequency 
components. 


IS   10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

8.3.3  Method  of  measurement  at  the  audio,  control  or  power  terminals  for  frequencies  below  30  MHz 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  2,  page  12,  with  the  selective  voltmeter 
connected  to  the  radio-frequency  output  terminals  (A)  of  the  line  stabilization  network. 

Note.  —  An  example  of  a  mains  power  line  stabilization  network  suitable  Tor  use  on  the  mains  power  line  is 
given  in  appendix  C.  Examples  of  networks  for  use  with  audio  lines  and  for  battery-powered 
equipment  are  under  consideration. 

b)  With  the  transmitter  operating  at  the  carrier  power  level  measured  in  8.2,  adjust  the 

0VJVVM  TV         *  Wl^UV'W**'*        %V       M»V      Wlftb^V       11VWWVUVJ        VB       %••»**■«      tfjftiSt>S  EVWiJ       A&M1  1VTT  -lS*»ft*VI  IT  l\lilt       ft  **Vii\J 

frequency  component  to  be  measured.  Record  the  frequency  and  the  voltage  of  each 
measured  component  along  with  the  input  impedance  of  the  selective  voltmeter. 

8.3.4  Presentation  of  results 

The  values  recorded  in  8.3.2  shall  be  expressed  either  as  absolute  power  or  as  a  ratio,  in 
decibels,  relative  to  the  carrier  power,  for  each  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  radio-frequency 
component  that  is  measured. 

The  values  recorded  in  8.3.3,  step  b)  shall  be  expressed  in  volts,  specifying  the  test  circuit 
used. 

The  carrier  power  level  shall  be  recorded,  as  measured  in  8.2. 

8.4     Spurious  transmitter  noise 

8.4. 1      General 

Spurious  transmitter  noise  which  falls  within  the  bandwidth  of  any  receiver  may  degrade 
the  receiver  performance.  The  methods  of  measurement  provide  for  assessing  the  transmitter 
noise  in  terms  of: 

a)  the  attenuation  required  to  avoid  more  than  a  specified  degradation  of  receiver  perfor- 
mance, or 

b)  the  spectral  power  density,  which  may  be  used  more  generally. 

Note.  —  This  method  of  measurement  may  not  be  suitable  for  certain  types  of  impulsive  noise. 


o  A  T 


Spurious  transmitter  noise  is  the  continuous  spectrum  of  noise  components  present  at  the 
transmitter  output  terminals. 

8.4.3     Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  3,  page  14. 

Note.  —  Recommended  characteristics  of  the  measuring  equipment  are  described  in  appendix  A. 

b)  With  the  transmitter  not  operating,  apply  a  signal  from  the  signal  generator  (7)  with 
standard  test  modulation  to  port  (b)  of  the  matching  or  combining  network  (6). 

c)  Adjust  the  standard  test  receiver  (8)  and  the  signal  generator  (7)  to  operate  on  a  f requeue 
which  is  displaced  from  the  transmitter  operating  frequency  by  A/  e.g.  -  40  kHz. 

d)  Adjust  the  signal  level  to  a  value  that  is  3  dB  greater  than  reference  sensitivity. 

e)  With  the  transmitter  operating  at  the  carrier  power  level  measured  in  8.2,  adjust  attenuate 
(4)  to  reduce  the  signal-to-noise  ratio  at  the  receiver  output  terminals  to  the  standard  value 
(12  dB  SI  NAD).  Record  the  values  of  attenuation  of  attenuator  (4)  and  of  the  match  i  it: 
combining  network  (b)  between  ports  (a)  and  (c). 

f)  Record  the  value  of  the  reference  sensitivity  of  the  test  receiver. 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2  ( 1991  ) 

g)  The  measurements  should  be  repeated  at  other  values  of  A/  above  and  below  the 
transmitter  carrier  frequency. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  spectral  power  density  of  the  transmitter  noise  at  each  of  the  Af 
values  referred  to  in  step  g),  proceed  as  follows: 

h)  With  the  transmitter  not  operating,  change  the  connection  at  PI  from  the  attenuator  (4)  to 
the  noise  generator  (5)  and,  with  the  radio-frequency  signal  generator  (7)  adjusted 
according  to  steps  b)  to  d)  above,  apply  a  noise  spectrum  from  the  noise  generator  (5)  at  a 
level  to  reduce  the  signal-to-noise  ratio  at  the  receiver  output  terminal  to  the  standard 
value,  i.e.  12  dB.  Record  the  value  of  the  spectral  power  density  p,  expressed  in  dB  (kT),  at 
the  output  of  the  noise  generator. 


/ 


/ 


dB 
T — 


o—» 1 


G 

kT 


r- 

c 

J 

b 

7 

G 

Note.  — 


Legend 

1  -  transmitter  under  test 

2  —  distortion-factor  meter 

3  -  test  load 

4  —  coupler/attenuator  device 

5  -  white  noise  generator  (if  used) 

6  —  matching  or  combining  network 

7  -  radio-frequency  signal  generator 

8  -  standard  test  receiver 

The  measuring  arrangement  shall  be  capable  of  measuring  noise  to  a  level  10  dB  lower  than  the  noise  of  the 
transmitter. 


FfG.  3.   —   Measuring  arrangement  for  terminal  spurious  transmitter  noise. 


The  spectral  power  density  iVof  the  transmitter  noise  at  the  radio  frequency  to  which  the 
receiver  is  tuned  is  equal  to  the  value  of  p  plus  the  attenuation  of  attenuator  (4)  recorded  in 
step  e). 
Note.  —  The  expression  "kT"  sometimes  appears  in  technical  documents  as  "kTb",  where  *b"  is  equal  to  a 


i)   The  measurements  should  be  repeated  at  other  values  of  Af  above  and  below  the  trans- 
mitter carrier  frequency. 


.4.4     Presentation  of  results 

a)  Required  path  attenuation  between  the  transmitter  output  terminals  and  the  receiver  input 
terminals 

Plot  the  values  of  total  attenuation  recorded  in  8.4.3,  steps  pjand  g),  on  the  linear  ordinate 
of  a  graph  with  the  values  of  A/on  the  logarithmic  abscissa. 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991) 

Record  the  value  of  the  reference  sensitivity  and/or  the  noise  figure  of  the  test  receiver. 

Note.  —   An  affected  receiver  may  have  different  characteristics  from  the  test  receiver  used.  This  should  be  taken 
into  account  when  interpreting  the  results. 

b)  Spectral  power  density  of  the  transmitter  noise 

Plot  the  spectral  power  densities  of  N  calculated  in  8.4.3,  step  h)on  the  linear  ordinate  of  a 

graph  with  the  values  of  A/on  the  logarithmic  abscissa. 

8.5     Adjacent  channel  power  for  transmitters  with  accessible  antenna  terminals 

8.5.1  Definition 

The  adjacent  channel  power  of  transmitters  operating  in  systems  allocated  on  a  channel 
basis  is  that  part  of  the  total  power  ouput  of  a  transmitter  which,  under  defined  conditions  of 
modulation,  falls  within  a  specified  bandwidth  centred  on  the  centre  frequency  of  either  of  the 
adjacent  channels. 

This  power  is  measured  by  means  of  a  power  measuring  receiver  having  its  -6  dB  response 
frequencies  displaced  from  the  transmitter  carrier  frequency  by  amounts  derived  from  the 
channel  spacing  or  by  means  of  a  spectrum  analyzer.  This  measurement  provides  the  ratio, 
expressed  in  decibels,  of  the  carrier  power  to  the  adjacent  channel  power.  For  the  purpose  of 
this  measurement,  this  ratio  is  called  the  "adjacent  channel  power  ratio". 

Note.  —  The  following  are  several  of  the  commonly  used  channel  spacings  and  specified  bandwidths: 

Channel  spacing!  (kHz)  SpecifiedbandwidthslkHz) 

30  16 

25  16 

20  16 

20  14 
15  8.5 

12.5  8.5 

10  8.5 

8.5.2  Method  of  measurement  -  Power  measuring  receiver 

a)  Connect  the  equipment,  as  illustrated  in  figure  4,  page  19,  using  a  power  measuring 
receiver  of  specified  selectivity.  See  clause  A7  of  appendix  A  for  the  required  characte- 
ristics of  the  power  measuring  receiver. 

b)  Operate  the  transmitter  at  the  carrier  power  measured  as  described  in  8.2. 

c)  Set  the  i.f.  attenuator  (4C)  to  a  high  value,  for  example  70  dB,  then  adjust  the  coupler/ 
attenuator  (3)  to  provide  a  signal  level  which  is  within  the  linear  range  of  the  power 
measuring  receiver. 

d)  Adjust  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A)  to  obtain  a  maximum  reading  on  the  r.m.s. 
meter  (4D).  Record  this  reading,  and  the  attenuation  of  the  i.f.  attenuator,  in  decibels. 

e)  Increase  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A)  until  the  indication  on  the  r.m.s.  meter  is 
reduced  by  6  dB.  Record  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator. 

f)  Increase  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A)  by  an  additional  amount  equal  to  the 
channel  spacing  minus  one-half  of  the  specified  bandwidth. 

Note.  —  The  following  are  several  of  the  commonly  used  channel  spacings  and  specified  bandwidths. 


Channel  spacings 

(kHz) 

Specified 

bandwidths  (kHz) 

Filler  bandwidths  (kHz) 

Displacement  of  the  reference  point 
from  the  carrier  frequency  (k  Hz) 

25 

16 

16 

17 

20 

16 

16 

12 

20 

14 

14 

13 

12.5 

8.5 

8.5 

8.25 

10 

8.5 

8.5 

5.75 

IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 

g)  Modulate  the  transmitter  at  I  250  ±  2  Hz  with  a  signal  at  a  level  which  is  10  dB  greater  than 
the  level  that  produces: 
! )  a  modulation  depth  of  60%  for  AM  transmitters,  or 

2)  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  for  FM  transmitter. 

For  equipment  without  modulation  limiters  which  are  intended  to  operate  at  a  fixed  input 

level,  the  measurement  should  be  made  using  the  input  signal  level  specified  by  the 

manufacturer. 
h)  Adjust  the  i.f.  attenuator  (4C)  until  the  indication  of  the  r.m.s.  meter  is  approximately  the 

same  as  that  recorded  in  step  d).  Record  the  reading  of  the  r.m.s.  meter  and  the  attenuation 

of  the  i.f.  attenuator,  in  decibels. 
i)  The  adjacent  channel  power  ratio,  A,  is  the  difference  of  the  attenuator  values,  recorded  in 

steps  d)  and  h).  corrected  for  the  difference  in  readings  of  the  r.m.s.  meter  in  those  steps. 

Record  this  value. 
j)   Remove  the  modulation  from  the  transmitter  and  set  the  i.f.  attenuator  to  the  value 

recorded  in  step  d). 
k)  Repeat  steps  c)  through  i),  but  decrease  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  in  steps  f) 

and  g). 

8.5.3  Presentation  of  results 

a)  Calculate  and  state  the  power,  P (adjacent  channel),  in  each  of  the  adjacent  channels  from 
the  ratios  A  recorded  in  8.5.2,  steps  i)and  k),  and  the  carrier  power  P(carrier)  measured  as 
described  in  8.2: 

P(adjacent  channel)  -  P(carrier)  x  10-A/l°  in  watts 

b)  Calculate  and  state  the  6  dB  bandwidth  of  the  power  measuring  receiver.  This  is  the 
difference  between  the  two  values  of  the  local  oscillator  frequency  recorded  in  8.5.2,  steps 
ejand  k). 

8.5.4  Methods  of  measurement  -  Spectrum  analyzer 

There  are  two  methods  of  measurement  using  a  spectrum  analyzer  given  here.  The  first 
method  (see  8.5.5)  allows  the  use  of  non-digital  storage  types  of  spectrum  analyzers  which  will 
give  a  measurement  accuracy  of  ±2  dB  when  a  significant  part  of  the  adjacent  channel  power 
is  contained  in  one  or  more  spectral  components  rather  than  in  the  noise. 

The  second  method  of  measurement  (see  8.5.7)  uses  a  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  and 
can  be  used  for  all  cases  when  a  detector  correction  factor  F„  is  applied,  typically  between  0 
and  2.5  dB  for  a  mixture  of  sinusoidal  components  and  thermal  noise.  For  this  standard,  F„ 
will  be  1  dB  (see  clause  A8  of  appendix  A  for  a  method  of  measurement  of  the  maximum 
adjacent  channel  power  ratio  of  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  be  used). 

8.5.5  Method  of  measurement  -  Non-digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer 

a)  Connect  the  equipment,  as  illustrated  in  figure  4,  page  19,  using  a  spectrum  analyzer  for 
item  (4).  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  as  follows: 

—  resolution  and  video  filter  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting,  but  not  less  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  divided  by  200  nor  greater  than  the  specified  bandwidth 
divided  by  40,  and  record  this  as  R; 

—  total  swept  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  -etting  which  is  equal  to  or  greater  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  and  record  this  as  B; 

—  the  sweep  time  to  greater  than  3  B/R2. 


10 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  19<> 
ISO   489-2  (1991  ) 

Adjust  the  coupler/attenuator  (3)  to  a  value  which  is  compatible  with  the  input  charaete 
ristics  of  the  spectrum  analyzer. 

b)  Operate  the  transmitter  unmodulated  at  the  carrier  power  measured  as  described  in  8.2. 

c)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
carrier  frequency  of  the  transmitter. 

d)  Adjust  the  coupler/attenuator  (3)  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  spectrum  analyzer  to  value 
suitable  to  provide  a  displayed  figure  on  the  screen  which  is  in  the  linear  range  of  inc. 
spectrum  analyzer.  Record  the  value  Pc  of  the  transmitted  carrier  in  dBm. 

e)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  tht 
centre  frequency  of  the  upper  adjacent  channel. 

f)  Modulate  the  transmitter  at  1  250  ±  2  Hz  with  a  signal  level  which  is  10  dB  greater  than  the 
level  that  produces: 

—  60%  modulation  depth  for  AM  transmitters,  oi 

—  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  for  FM  transmitters 

For  equipment  without  modulation  limiters  which  are  intended  to  operate  at  a  fixed  inpus 
level,  the  measurement  should  be  made  using  the  input  signal  level  specified  by  the 
manufacturer. 

g)  Within  the  specified  bandwidth  determine  whether  the  value  of  the  largest  component 
exceeds  the  highest  noise  power  level  by  at  least 

101g(B/R)  +  3dB 

If  not,  the  method  of  measurement  in  8.5.7  should  be  used. 

If  so,  record  the  values  of  the  components  A\,  Ay, ...  Aa,  within  the  specified  bandwidth  n 
dBm.  Calculate  and  record  the  indicated  adjacent  channel  power 

Pa-  10  Ig  I  10*"0    dBm 

i-  I 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 
h)  Using  the  lower  adjacent  channel,  repeat  steps  ej  through  g). 

8  ^  f*        Pr0t/>nt/itis\rt  stfrvrultc 
..v,        •  ........ .._..„..  „_,  .  _„ — .„ 

a)  Calculate  the  ratio  PR  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel  using  the  following  relationship 

PR-Pc-P*    dB 

where: 

Pc  is  tbe  value  recorded  in  8.5.5,  step  d) 

Pt  is  the  value  recorded  in  8.5.5,  step  g),  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel 

b)  Repeat  step  a)  for  the  lower  adjacent  channel. 

c)  Record  the  lower  value  of  PR  calculated  in  steps  a)  and  b)  as  the  adjacent  cham -,-. 
ratio  (ACPR). 

d)  Calculate  the  power  (adjacent  channel)  P»dj  using  the  following  relationship: 

Padj-Px  lO-'"*"0      W 

where: 

/'is  the  carrier  power  measured  in  8.2.2  in  watts 
A  CPR  is  the  value  recorded  in  step  c) 

Record  this  value  as  the  adjacent  channel  power. 

e)  Record  the  channel  spacing,  the  specified  bandwidth  and  the  carrier  power 


11 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

8.5.7  Method  of  measurement  -  Digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  4,  page  19,  using  a  digital  storage  spectrum 
analyzer  for  item  (4).  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  as  follows: 

—  resolution  and  video  filter  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting,  but  not  less  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  divided  by  200  nor  greater  than  the  specified  bandwidth 
divided  by  40,  and  record  this  as  R; 

—  total  swept  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting  which  is  equal  to  or  greater  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  and  record  this  as  B; 

—  the  sweep  time  to  greater  than  3  B/R2. 

Adjust  the  coupler/attenuator  (3)  to  a  value  which  is  compatible  with  the  input  charac- 
teristics of  the  spectrum  analyzer. 

b)  Operate  the  transmitter  unmodulated  at  the  carrier  power  measured  as  described  in  8.2. 

c)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
carrier  frequency  of  the  transmitter. 

d)  Adjust  the  coupler/attenuator  (3)  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  spectrum  analyzer  to  values 
suitable  to  provide  a  displayed  figure  on  the  screen  which  is  in  the  linear  range  of  the 
spectrum  analyzer. 

Activate  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  record  the  values  Q  in  dBm  for  at  least 
200  samples  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  specified  bandwidth.  Calculate  and 
record  the  indicated  carrier  power 

Pc=101g  I  10C/'°    dBm 

i-  1 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 

e)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
centre  frequency  of  the  upper  adjacent  channel. 

f)  Modulate  the  transmitter  at  1  250  ±  2  Hz  with  a  signal  level  which  is  10  dB  greater  than  the 
level  that  produces: 

—  60%  modulation  depth  for  AM  transmitters,  or 

—  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  for  FM  transmitters. 

For  equipment  without  modulation  limiters  which  are  intended  to  operate  at  a  fixed  input 
level,  the  measurement  should  be  made  using  the  input  signal  level  specified  by  the 
manufacturer. 

g)  Activate  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  record  the  values  A,  in  dBm  for  the  same 
number  of  samples  used  in  step  d)  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  specified 
bandwidth.  Calculate  and  record  the  indicated  adjacent  channel  power 

i—  n 

Pa=  10  lg  I   10*710     dBm 
«-  i 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 

h)  Using  the  lower  adjacent  channel  repeat  steps  e)  through  g). 

8.5.8  Presentation  of  results 

a)  Calculate  the  ratio  PR  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel  using  the  following  relationship: 

PR=Pc-(Pa+l]    dE 


12 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2  (1991  ) 

where: 

Pc  is  the  value  recorded  in  8.5.7,  step  d) 

P,  is  the  value  recorded  in  8.5.7,  step  g),  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel 

Note.  —  For  an  explanation  of  the  l  dB  in  the  equation,  see  8.5.4. 

b)  Repeat  step  a)  for  the  lower  adjacent  channel 

c)  Record  the  lower  value  of  PR  calculated  in  steps  a)  and  b)  as  the  adjacent  channel  power 
ratio  (ACPR). 

d)  Calculate  the  power  (adjacent  channel)  Padj  using  the  following  relationship: 

Padj-PxlO-^^W 

where: 

Pis  the  carrier  power  measured  in  8.2.2  in  watts 

ACPR  is  the  value  recorded  in  step  c) 

Record  this  value  as  the  adjacent  channel  power. 

e)  Record  the  channel  spacing,  the  specified  bandwidth  and  the  carrier  power. 


4F~ 


4B 


/ 


£ 


4D 


Legend 

1  -  transmitter  under  test 

2  -  audio-frequency  generator 

3  -  coupler/attenuator  device  (may  be  incorporated  in  the  test  load) 

4  —  power  measuring  receiver 

4A  -  mixer  and  local  oscillator 

4B  -  channel  band-pass  filter 

4C  -  i.f.  attenuator  (0  to  80  dB) 

4D  -  r.m.s.  meter  (may  be  preceded  by  an  i.f.  amplifier) 

5  -  test  load 


FIG.  4.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  terminal  adjacent  channel  power. 


13 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO   489-2  ( 1991  ) 

9.     Radiated  radio-frequency  power 

These  measurements  are  usually  made  only  on  transmitters  having  integral  antennas. 

9.1  General 

The  radiated  radio-frequency  power  output  of  a  transmitter  may  contain: 

—  a  carrier  component  (see  8.2); 

—  modulation  components  determining  transmission  quality  (see  clauses  12, 13  and  14); 

—  other  modulation  components  (e.g.  components  contributing  to  the  adjacent  channel 
power)  (see  8.5); 

—  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  components  (see  9.3); 

—  noise,  both  inside  the  band  (see  clause  16)  and  outside  the  band,  where  it  is  called  spurious 
transmitter  noise  (see  9.4),  and 

—  inter-transmitter  intermodulation  products  (see  clause  1 1 ). 

The  measured  levels  may  be  due  to  the  radiation  from  the  antenna,  audio  lines,  control 
lines,  power  mains  or  from  the  cabinet 

These  measurements  generally  require  the  use  of  a  test  site.  Guides  for  the  construction  of 
such  test  sites  are  given  in  appendices  of  this  standard. 

9.2  A  verage  radiated  power  for  transmitters  with  integral  antennas 

9.2.1  Definition 

The  average  of  the  radiated  powers  in  eight  directions  distributed  at  45°  angles  in  the 
horizontal  plane. 

9.2.2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Choose  the  test  site  suitable  for  the  frequency  and  use  of  the  transmitter  from  those 
described  in  the  appendices. 

The  30  m  test  site  (appendix  B)  should  be  the  reference  for  transmitters  operating  in  the 
frequency  range  25  MHz  to  1  000  MHz.  Any  other  test  site  described  in  some  appendices 
of  this  standard  miy  also  be  used,  provided  account  is  taken  of  the  limitations  attached  to 
the  use  of  the  test  site  that  is  chosen. 

b)  Connect  the  equipment  under  test  as  illustrated  in  the  chosen  appendix. 

c)  Adjust  the  length  of  the  measuring  antenna  (if  adjustable)  for  the  frequency  of  the 
transmitter. 

d)  Position  the  measuring  antenna  within  the  specified  elevation  range  for  vertical  pola- 
rization. 

e)  Activate  the  transmitter. 

f)  Tune  the  selective  measuring  device,  e.g.  spectrum  analyzer,  to  the  transmitter  operating 
frequency. 

g)  Rotate  the  equipment  under  test  to  obtain  the  maximum  indication  on  the  selective 
measuring  device. 

h)  Raise  and  lower  the  measuring  antenna  to  obtain  the  maximum  indication  on  the 
selective  measuring  device.  Note  the  value  of  the  indication  and  the  setting  of  the 
attenuator. 

Note.  —  The  maximum  may  be  a  lower  value  than  the  value  obtainable  at  heights  outside  the  specified  limits. 
i)     Rotate  the  equipment  under  test  45°  clockwise  and  note  the  new  value. 


14 


IS  10820(Part2):1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

j)     Repeat  step  i)  until  values  have  been  obtained  for  eight  azimuth  positions. 

k)  Replace  the  equipment  under  test  with  the  auxiliary  antenna  connected  to  the  radio- 
frequency  generator,  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  in  the  chosen  appendix. 

I)  Raise  and  lower  the  measuring  antenna  to  obtain  the  maximum  indication  on  the 
selective  measuring  device. 

m)  Adjust  the  output  of  the  r.f.  signal  generator,  and  where  necessary  the  attenuator,  to 
obtain  the  level  recorded  in  step  h).  Record  the  output  level  corrected  for  the  attenuator 
value. 

9.2.3     Presentation  of  results 

Calculate  the  maximum  effective  radiated  power,  Pmtx,  of  the  equipment  under  test  from 
the  reading  taken  in  9.2.2,  step  h),  taking  into  account  the  attenuator  setting,  the  auxiliary 
antenna  gain,  and  the  cable  loss  between  the  generator  and  the  auxiliary  antenna. 

Notes  1.  -  The  measured  power  of  an  unmodulated  AM  transmitter  should  be  multiplied  by  1.18  to  take  into 
account  the  additional  power  corresponding  to  a  modulation  depth  of  60%. 

The  radiated  power  is  the  average  of  die  eight  values  calculated  above. 

2.  -  On  request,  the  maximum  radiated  power,  which  is  the  maximum  value  determined  above,  can  be  stated. 

9.3     Spurious  narrow-bandwidth  components 

9.3.1  Definition 

Spurious  narrow-bandwidth  radio-frequency  components  include  harmonic  and 
non-harmonic  components  and  parasitic  components  that  are  usually  characterized  by  a 
signal  having  a  dominant  component  at  a  discrete  frequency  or  in  a  narrow  band  of  fre- 
quencies. 

Components  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  necessary  band  which  are  a  result  of  the 
modulation  process  for  the  transmission  of  information  are  excluded. 

9.3.2  Method  of  measurement  (see  figure  5,  page  23) 

Note.  —  The  value  of  the  average  radiated  power  determined  in  9-2  is  required  for  this  measurement.  It  should  be 
measured  on  the  same  test  site  that  is  chosen  in  the  following  step  a). 

a)  Choose  the  test  site,  suitable  for  the  range  of  frequencies  applicable  and  power  levels  to 
be  measured,  from  those  described  in  the  test  site  appendices. 

b)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  the  chosen  appendix.  When  a  particular  step  in 
the  method  of  measurement  requires  an  antenna  to  be  raised  and  lowered  to  find  a 
maximum  indication,  use  the  height  limits  in  the  chosen  test  site  description, 

c)  Activate  the  equipment  under  test  (unmodulated). 

Note.  —  Radio  regulations  establish  limits  for  spurious  components  of  a  modulated  emission.  However,  at  this 
time  no  practical  method  has  been  developed  for  measuring  spurious  components  of  the  transmitter 

nimv  waug  aiaww**B*w* 

d)  Identify  the  frequencies  of  the  significant  spectral  components  by  using  the  selective 
measuring  device,  e.g.  spectrum  analyzer.  If  necessary,  closely  couple  it  to  the  equipment 
under  test. 

e)  Adjust  the  measuring  antenna  (if  adjustable)  to  the  correct  length  for  the  frequency  of 
each  significant  spectral  component  to  be  considered. 

f)  Tune  the  selective  measuring  device  to  a  significant  spectral  component. 

g)  Orient  the  measuring  antenna  so  that  it  is  vertically  polarized. 


15 


IS  10820  (Part2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991) 

h)    Rotate  the  equipment  under  test  to  obtain  the  maximum  indication  on  the  selective 

measuring  device. 
i)     When  required  by  the  test  site  description,  raise  and  lower  the  measuring  antenna  to 

obtain  the  maximum  indication  on  the  selective  measuring  device. 

Note.  —  The  maximum  may  be  a  lower  value  than  the  value  obtainable  at  heights  outside  the  specified  limits. 

j)     Repeat  steps  h)  and  i)  until  no  further  increase  occurs.  Record  the  corresponding 

maximum  indication  and  the  frequency  of  the  component 
k)    Orient  the  measuring  antenna  so  that  it  is  horizontally  polarized  and  repeat  steps  h),  i) 

andj). 
I)     Repeat  steps  e)  to  k)  for  all  significant  spectral  components  until  the  levels  have  been 

measured  for  all  significant  spectral  components. 

m)  Replace  the  equipment  under  test  with  the  auxiliary  antenna. 

n)    Select  one  of  the  significant  spectral  components  measured  in  step  j)  and  adjust  the 
frequency  of  the  radio-frequency  generator  to  its  frequency. 

o)    Adjust  the  length  of  the  auxiliary  antenna  (if  adjustable)  to  the  frequency  of  the  signi- 
ficant spectral  component. 
p)    Adjust  the  length  of  the  measuring  antenna  (if  adjustable)  to  the  frequency  of  the 

significant  spectral  component. 
q)    Tune  the  selective  measuring  device  to  the  frequency  of  the  significant  spectral 

component. 
r)     Position  the  auxiliary  and  measuring  antennas  for  vertical  polarization. 
s)     Adjust  the  output  level  of  the  radio-frequency  signal  generator  to  provide  an  indication 

on  the  selective  measuring  device. 
t)     Raise  and  lower  the  measuring  antenna  to  obtain  the  maximum  indication  on  the 

selective  measuring  device. 
u)    Readjust  the  output  level  of  the  radio-frequency  signal  generator  to  obtain  the  same  vilue 

of  indication  as  noted  in  step  j).  Note  the  output  level  of  the  radio-frequency  signal 

generator  and  its  frequency. 
v)    Repeat  steps  s)  to  u)  with  the  auxiliary  and  measuring  antennas  horizontally  polarized. 

w)    Repeat  steps  n)  to  v)  for  the  remaining  significant  spectral  components  measured  in 
step  jj. 


16 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


9> 


h) 


k) 


START 


5. 


Select  test  site 


Connect  equipment  under  test 


Activate  equipment  under  test 
(unmodulated] 


Identify  significant  spectral 
components 


Tune  measuring  antenna  to  a  spectral 
component 


X 


Tune  selective  measuring  device 


Orient  measuring  antenna  to  vertical 
polarization 


Rotate  equipment  under  test  for 
maximum  indication 


Raise  and  lower  measuring  antenna 
for  maximum  indication 


Record  frequency  and 
indicated  value 


No 


Orient  measuring 
antenna  to 
horizontal  polarization 


No 


k) 


Yes 


IS   10820(Part2):1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 


No 


m) 


n) 


o) 
P) 


Q> 


Replace  equipment  under  test  by  auxiliary 
antenna 


Tune  signal  generator  to  a  spectral 
component 


Tune  auxiliary  and  measuring  antennas 


Tune  selective  measuring  device 


Orient  both  antennas  to  vertical 
polarization 


S) 


Adjust  signal  generator  output  level 


Raise  and  lower -measuring  antenna  for 
maximum  indication 


U) 


Adiust  signal  generator  level  t,o  give 
the  same  indication  as  in  Step// 


U) 


Record  frequency  and 
signal  generator  level 


Fig.  5.  - 


Onent  both 
antennas  to 
obtain  horizontal 
polarization 


v) 


IS   10820  {  Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2  ( 1991  ) 

9.3.3     Presentation  of  results 

Calculate  the  power  available  to  the  auxiliary  antenna  from  the  values  noted  in  9.3.2, 
step  u),  taking  into  account  the  different  settings  of  the  attenuator,  the  gain  of  the  auxi- 
liary antenna  and  the  cable  loss  between  the  radio-frequency  signal  generator  and  the 
auxiliary  antenna.  ; 

The  powers  thus  calculated  characterize  the  spurious  narrow-bandwidth  components  of  the 
transmitter  under  test.  Each  should  be  expressed  either  as  an  absolute  value  or  in  decibels  in 
relation  to  the  average  radiated  power  as  described  in  9.2. 

Record  these  powers  and  frequencies  of  the  corresponding  spurious  narrow-bandwidth 
components  in  a  table. 

9.4     Spurious  transmitter  noise 

9.4.1  General 

Spurious  transmitter  noise  which  falls  within  the  bandwith  of  any  receiver  may  degrade  the 
receiver  performance.  The  methods  of  measurement  provide  for  assessing  the  transmitter 
noise  in  terms  of: 

a)  the  attenuation  required  to  avoid  more  than  a  specified  degradation  of  receiver  per- 
formance, or 

b)  the  spectral  power  density,  which  may  be  used  more  generally. 

9.4.2  Definition 

Spurious  transmitter  noise  is  the  continuous  spectrum  of  noise  components  radiated  by  the 
transmitter. 

9.4.3  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  6,  page  25. 

Note    —  Recommended  characteristics  of  the  standard  test  receiver  arc  described  in  appendix  A. 

b)  Place  the  transmitter  near  the  test  antenna  or  in  the  position  specified  for  any  other 
radiation-coupling  device. 

c)  Operate  the  transmitter  at  the  output  power  level  measured  in  9.2  modulated  with 
standard  test  modulation. 

d)  Adjust  the  receiver  (8)  to  receive  the  transmitter  carrier  frequency  and  reduce  the  radio- 
frequency  signal  generator  (7)  output  to  minimum. 

e)  Adjust  attenuator  (4)  to  produce  the  standard  signal-to-noise  ratio,  i.e.  12  dB  at  the 
receiver  output  terminals.  Record  the  value  of  attenuation  of  attenuator  (4). 

f)  With  the  transmitter  not  operating,  adjust  the  frequency  of  the  radio-frequency  signal 
generator  to  the  frequency  of  the  test  receiver  and  adjust  the  signal  level  to  produce  the 
standard  signal-to-noise  ratio  (12  dB)  at  the  receiver  output  terminals.  Measure  and 
record  the  power  at  port  (b)  of  the  matching  or  combining  network  (6).  Verify  that  the 
coupling  loss  from  ports  (a)  to  (c)  is  the  same  as  from  ports  (b)  to  (c). 

g)  Calculate  the  coupling  loss  from  the  transmitter  to  port  (a).  It  is  the  value  of  the  ratio,  in 
decibels,  of  the  transmitter  effective  radiated  power  to  the  power  measured  at  port  (b). 
(Both  powers  are  expressed  in  dBW.) 

h)  Calculate  the  coupling  loss  of  the  coupling  device  (3).  It  is  the  value  calculated  in  step  g) 
minus  the  attenuation  of  attenuator  (4),  recorded  in  step  e). 

i)  Adjust  the  standard  test  receiver  (8)  and  the  radio-frequency  signal  generator  (7)  to 
operate  on  a  frequency  which  is  displaced  from  the  transmitter  operating  frequency  by 
A/;  e.g.  40  kHz. 


Ifi 


IS   10820  (Part  2) 
ISO   489-2  (1991  ) 

j)     Adjust  the  input  signal  to  a  level  that  is  3  dB  greater  than  reference  sensitivity. 


1996 


k) 


I) 
m) 


n) 


With  the  unmodulated  transmitter  operating  at  the  carriei  power  level  measured  in  9-2, 
adjust  attenuator  (4)  to  induce  the  signal-to-noise  ratio  at  the  receiver  output  terminals  to 
12  dB.  Record  the  values  of  attenuation  of  attenuator  (4)  and  of  the  matching  or 
combining  network  between  ports  (a)  and  (c). 

Record  the  value  of  the  reference  sensitivity  of  the  test  receiver. 

The  measurements  should  be  repeated  at  other  values  of  A/ above  and  below  the  trans 
mitter  carrier  frequency. 

In  order  to  obtain  the  spectral  power  density  of  the  transmitter  noise  at  each  of  the  values 
of  A/referred  to  in  step  m),  proceed  as  follows: 

With  the  transmitter  not  operating,  change  the  connection  at  PI  from  the  attenuator  (4)  to 
the  noise  generator  (5)  and  with  the  radio-frequency  signal  generator  (7)  adjusted 
according  to  steps  i)  and  j)  above,  apply  a  noise  spectrum  from  the  noise  generator  (5)  at  a 
level  to  reduce  the  signal-to-noise  ratio  at  the  receiver  output  terminal  to  the  standard 
value,  i.e.  12  dB.  Record  the  value  of  the  spectral  power  density  p,  expressed  in  dB  (kT),  at 
the  output  of  the  noise  generator. 


Qjf] 


Pi 


G 

kT 


"1 

a 

c 

1 

1 

6 
7 

C 

b 

8 

9 

Legend 

1  -  transmitter  under  test 

2  -  audio-frequency  generator 

3  -  calibrated  loop  antenna 

4  —  coupling  device,  e.g.  calibrated  loop  antenna 

5  —  white  noise  generator  (if  used) 

6  -  matching  or  combining  network 

7  *■  radio-frequency  signal  generator 

8  -  standard  test  receiver 

9  -  distortion-factor  meter 

Note.  —  The  measuring  arrangement  shall  be  capable  of  measuring  noise  to  a  level  10  dB  lower  than  the  noise  of  the 
transmitter. 

Fig.  6.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  radiated  spurious  transmitter  noise. 


The  spectral  power  density  N  of  the  transmitter  noise  at  the  radio  frequency  to  which  the 
receiver  is  tuned  is  equal  to  the  value  of  p  plus  the  attenuation  of  attenuator  (4)  recorded  in 
step  fcj,  plus  the  coupling  loss  recorded  in  step  h). 

9.4.4     Presentation  of  results 

a)  Required  path  attenuation  between  the  transmitter  output  and  the  receiver  input  terminals 


15 


IS   10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

Add  the  attenuations  recorded  in  9.4.3,  steps  h)  and  k),  and  plot  this  value  on  the  linear 
ordinate  of  a  graph  with  the  values  of  A/on  the  logarithmic  abscissa. 

Record  the  value  of  the  reference  sensitivity  and/or  the  noise  figure  of  the  test  receiver. 

Note.  —  An  affected  receiver  may  have  different  characteristics  from  the  test  receiver  used.  This  should  be  taken 
into  account  when  interpreting  the  results. 

b)  Spectral  power  density  of  the  transmitter  noise 

Plot  the  spectral  power  densities  in  values  on  N  calculated  in  9.4.3,  step  n),  on  the  linear 
ordinate  of  a  graph  with  the  values  of  A/on  the  logarithmic  abscissa. 

9.5     Radiated  adjacent  channel  power  for  transmitters  with  integral  antennas 
9.5.1      Definition 

The  adjacent  channel  power  of  transmitters  operating  in  systems  allocated  on  a  channel 
basis  is  that  part  of  the  total  power  output  of  a  transmitter,  under  defined  conditions  of 
modulation,  which  falls  within  a  specified  bandwidth  centred  on  the  centre  frequency  of 
either  of  the  adjacent  channels. 

This  power  is  measured  by  means  of  a  power  measuring  receiver  having  its  —6  dB  response 
frequencies  displaced  from  the  transmitter  carrier  frequency  by  amounts  derived  from  the 
channel  spacing  or  by  means  of  a  spectrum  analyzer.  This  measurement  provides  the  ratio, 
expressed  in  decibels,  of  the  carrier  power  to  the  adjacent  channel  power.  For  the  purpose  of 
this  measurement  this  ratio  is  called  the  "adjacent  channel  power  ratio". 

Note.  —  The  following  are  several  of  the  commonly  used  channel  spacings  and  specified  bandwtdths. 

Channel  spacing!  (kHz)  Specified  bandwtdths  (kHz) 

30  16 

25  16 

20  16 

20  14 

15  8.5 

12.5  8.5 

10  8.5 


9.5.2     Method  of  measurement  -  Power  measuring  receiver 

a)  Connect  the  equipment,  as  illustrated  in  figure  7,  page  31,  using  a  power  measuring 
receiver  of  specified  selectivity.  See  clause  A7  of  appendix  A  for  the  required  character- 
istics of  the  power  measuring  receiver. 

b)  Place  the  transmitter  near  the  test  antenna  or  in  the  position  specified  for  any  other 
radiation-coupling  device. 

c)  Operate  the  transmitter  at  the  effective  radiated  power  level  measured  as  described  in  9.2. 

d)  Set  the  i.f.  attenuator  (4C)  to  a  high  value,  for  example  70  dB,  then  adjust  the  coupler/ 
attenuator  (3)  to  provide  a  signal  level  which  is  within  the  linear  range  of  the  power 
measuring  receiver. 

e)  Adjust  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A)  to  obtain  a  maximum  reading  on  the  r.m.s. 
meter  (4D).  Record  this  reading,  and  the  attenuation  of  the  i.f.  attenuator,  in  decibels. 

f)  Increase  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A)  until  the  indication  on  the  r.m.s.  meter  is 
reduced  by  6  dB.  Record  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator. 

g)  Increase  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A)  by  an  additional  amount  equal  to  the 
channel  spacing  minus  one-half  of  the  specified  bandwidth. 


20 


IS   10820fPart2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2  ( 1991  > 


Note.  —  The  following  are  several  of  the  commonly  used  channel  spacings  and  specified  bandwidths. 


'  spacing*  (kHz) 

25 

Specified  bandwidths  (kHz) 

16 

Filler  bandwidths  (kHz) 
16 

Displacement  of the  reference  point 
from  the  carrier  frequency  tk  Hz) 

17 

20 
20 

16 
14 

16 
14 

12 

13 

12.5 

8.5 

8.5 

8.25 

10 

8.5 

8.5 

5.75 

h)  Modulate  the  transmitter  at  1  250  ±  2  Hz  with  a  signal  at  a  level  which  is  1 0  dB  greater  than 
the  level  that  produces: 

1)  a  modulation  depth  of  60%  for  AM  transmitters,  or 

2)  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  for  FM  transmitters. 

For  equipment  without  modulation  limiters  which  are  intended  to  operate  at  a  fixed  input 
level,  the  measurement  should  be  made  using  the  input  signal  level  specified  by  the 
manufacturer. 

i)  Adjust  the  i.f.  attenuator  (4C)  until  the  indication  of  the  r.m.s.  meter  is  approximately  the 
same  as  that  recorded  in  step  d).  Record  the  reading  of  the  r.m.s.  meter  and  the  attenuation 
of  the  i.f.  attenuator,  in  decibels. 

j)  The  adjacent  channel  power  ratio,  A,  is  the  difference  of  the  attenuator  values  recorded  in 
steps  ejand  i),  corrected  for  the  difference  in  readings  of  the  r.m.s.  meter  recorded  in  those 
steps.  Record  this  value. 

k)  Remove  the  modulation  from  the  transmitter  and  set  the  i.f.  attenuator  (4C)  to  the  value 
recorded  in  step  e). 

I)  Repeat  steps  d)  through  j)  but  decrease  the  frequency  of  the  local  oscillator  in  steps  f) 
and  g). 

9.5.3  Presentation  of  results 

a)  Calculate  and  state  the  power,  ^(adjacent  channel),  in  each  of  the  adjacent  channels  from 
the  ratios  A  recorded  in  9.5.2,  steps/)  and  I),  and  the  effective  radiated  power,  P (effective 
radiated)  measured  in  9.2,  from  the  formula: 

P(adjacent  channel)  —  ineffective  radiated)  x  I0_A/I°  in  watts 

b)  Calculate  and  state  the  6dB  bandwidth  of  the  power  measuring  receiver.  This  is  the 
difference  between  the  two  values  of  the  local  oscillator  frequency  recorded  in  steps  f) 
and  /;. 

9.5.4  Methods  of  measurement  -  Spectrum  analyzer 

There  are  two  methods  of  measurement  using  a  spectrum  analyzer  given  here.  The  first 
method  (see  9.5.5)  allows  the  use  of  non-digital  storage  types  of  spectrum  analyzers  which  will 
give  a  measurement  accuracy  of  ±  2  dB  when  a  significant  part  of  the  adjacent  channel  power 
is  contained  in  one  or  more  spectral  components  rather  than  in  the  noise. 

The  second  method  of  measurement  (see  9.5.7)  uses  a  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  and 
can  be  used  for  all  cases  when  a  detector  correction  factor  F„  is  applied,  typically  between  0 
and  2.5  dB  for  a  mixture  of  sinusoidal  components  and  thermal  noise.  For  this  standard,  Fn 
will  be  1  dB  (see  clause  A8  of  appendix  A  for  a  method  of  measurement  of  the  maximum 
adjacent  channel  power  ratio  of  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  be  used). 

9.5.5  Method  of  measurement  -  Non-digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  7,  page  31,  using  a  spectrum  analyzer  for 
item  (4).  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  as  follows: 


21 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

—  resolution  and  video  filter  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting,  but  not  less  than 
the  specified  bandwith  divided  by  200  nor  greater  than  the  specified  bandwidth  divided 
by  40,  and  record  this  as  R; 

—  total  swept  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting  which  is  equal  to  or  greater  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  and  record  this  as  B; 

—  the  sweep  time  to  greater  than  3  B/R2. 

Adjust  the  coupler/attenuator  (3)  to  a  value  which  is  compatible  with  the  input  charac- 
teristics of  the  spectrum  analyzer. 
6;  Operate  the  transmitter  unmodulated  at  the  carrier  power  measured  as  described  in  8.2. 

c)  Place  the  transmitter  near  the  test  antenna  or  in  the  position  specified  for  any  other 
radio-frequency  coupling  device. 

d)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
carrier  frequency  of  the  transmitter. 

e)  Adjust  the  coupler/ attenuator  (3)  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  spectrum  analyzer  to  values 
suitable  to  provide  a  displayed  figure  on  the  screen  which  is  in  the  linear  range  of  the 
spectrum  analyzer.  Record  the  value  Pc  of  the  transmitted  carrier  in  dBm. 

f)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
centre  frequency  of  the  upper  adjacent  channel. 

g)  Modulate  the  transmitter  at  1 250  ±  2  Hz  with  a  signal  level  which  is  10  dB  greater  than  the 
level  that  produces: 

—  60%  modulation  depth  for  AM  transmitters,  or 

—  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  for  FM  transmitters. 

For  equipment  without  modulation  limiters  which  are  intended  to  operate  at  a  fixed  input 
level,  the  measurement  should  be  made  using  the  input  signal  level  specified  by  the 
manufacturer. 
h)  Within  the  specified  bandwith  determine  whether  the  amplitude  of  the  largest  component 
exceeds  the  highest  noise  power  level  by  at  least 

101g(B/R)  +  3dB 
If  not,  the  method  of  measurement  in  9.5.7  should  be  used. 

If  so,  record  the  values  of  the  components  Au  Ai, ....  An,  within  the  specified  bandwith,  in 
dBm.  Calculate  and  record  the  indicated  adjacent  channel  power 

Pa-lOIgYlO^10    dBm 

'  i-l 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 
i)   Using  the  lower  adjacent  channel,  repeat  steps/)  through  h ). 

>.5.6     Presentation  of  results 

a)  Calculate  the  ratio  PR  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel  using  the  following  relationship: 

PR=  Pc-  Pa     dB 

where: 

Pc  is  the  value  recorded  in  9.5.5,  step  e) 

P,  is  the  value  recorded  in  9.5.5,  step  h),  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel 

b)  Repeat  step  a)  for  the  lower  adjacent  channel. 


22 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

c)  Record  the  lower  value  of  PR  calculated  in  steps  a)  and  b)  as  the  adjacent  channel  power 
ratio  (ACPR). 

d)  Calculate  the  power  (adjacent  channel)  Pa<jj  using  the  following  relationship: 

Padj-/»xl0-^CP*/l0W 
where: 

Pis  the  effective  radiated  power  measured  in  9.2.2  in  watts 
ACPR  is  the  value  recorded  in  step  c) 
Record  this  value  as  the  adjacent  channel  power. 

e)  Record  the  channel  spacing,  the  specified  bandwidth  and  the  effective  radiated  power. 

9.5.7     Method  of  measurement  -  Digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  6,  page  25,  using  a  digital  storage  spectrum 
analyzer  for  item  (4).  Adjust  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  as  follows: 

—  resolution  and  video  filter  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting,  but  not  less  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  divided  by  200  nor  greater  than  the  specified  bandwidth 
divided  by  40  and  record  this  as  R; 

—  total  swept  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting  which  is  equal  to  or  greater  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  and  record  this  as  5; 

—  the  sweep  time  to  greater  than  3  B/R2. 

Adjust  the  coupler/attenuator  (3)  to  a  value  which  is  compatible  with  the  input  charac- 
teristics of  the  spectrum  analyzer. 

b)  Operate  the  transmitter  unmodulated  at  the  carrier  power  measured  as  described  in  8.2. 

c)  Place  the  transmitter  near  the  test  antenna  or  in  the  position  specified  for  any  other 
radio-frequency  coupling  device. 

d)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
carrier  frequency  of  the  transmitter. 

e)  Adjust  the  coupler  attenuator  (3)  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  spectrum  analyzer  to  values 
suitable  to  provide  a  displayed  figure  on  the  screen  which  is  in  the  linear  range  of  the 
spectrum  analyzer. 

Activate  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  record  the  values  Q  in  dBm  for  at  least 
200  samples  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  specified  bandwidth.  Calculate  and 
record  the  indicated  carrier  power: 

Pc-  10  lg  I  10q/,°    dBm 

i-  i 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples. 

f)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure  coincides  with  the 
centre  frequency  of  the  upper  adjacent  channel. 

g)  Modulate  the  transmitter  at  1 250  ±  2  Hz  with  a  signal  level  which  is  10  dB  greater  than  the 
level  that  produces: 

—  60%  modulation  depth  for  AM  transmitters,  or 

—  60%  of  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  for  FM  transmitters. 


23 


IS  10820  (Part2):  1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 

For  equipment  without  modulation  limiters  which  are  intended  to  operate  at  a  fixed  input 
level,  the  measurement  should  be  made  using  the  input  signal  level  specified  by  the 
manufacturer. 
h)  Activate  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  record  the  values  A,  in  dBm  for  the  same 
number  of  samples  used  in  step  d)  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  specified 
bandwidth.  Calculate  and  record  the  indicated  adjacent  channel  power 

i~  n 

i>a  =  10  Ig  I  lO*710    dBm 

i-  I 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 
i)   Using  the  lower  adjacent  channel,  repeat  steps  f)  through  h). 

9.5.8     Presentation  of  results 

a)  Calculate  the  ratio  PR  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel  using  the  following  relationship: 

PR-  Pc-[P>+1]    dB 

where: 

Pc  is  the  value  recorded  in  9.5.7,  step  e) 

P,  is  the  value  recorded  in  9.5.7,  step  h),  for  the  upper  adjacent  channel 

Note.  —  For  an  explanation  of  the  1  dB  in  the  equation,  see  9.5.4. 

b)  Repeat  step  a)  for  the  lower  adjacent  channel. 

c)  Record  the  lower  value  of  PR  calculated  in  steps  a)  and  b)  as  the  adjacent  channel  power 
ratio  (AC PR). 

d)  Calculate  the  power  (adjacent  channel)  Padj  using  the  following  relationship: 

Padj"  PX\0-ACPR/10      W 
where: 

P  is  the  effective  radiated  power  measured  in  9.2.2  in  watts 
ACPR  is  the  value  recorded  in  step  c) 

Record  this  value  as  the  adjacent  channel  power. 

e)  Record  the  channel  spacing,  the  specified  bandwidth  and  the  effective  radiated  power. 


24 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2  (1991  ) 


1 

G 
9 

Legend 


5  - 


transmitter  under  test 

audio-frequency  generator 

coupler /attenuator  device 

power  measuring  receiver 

4A  -  mixer  and  local  oscillator 

4B  —  channel  band-pass  filter 

4C  -  i.f.  attenuator  (0  to  80  dB) 

4D  —  r.m.s.  meter  (may  be  preceded  by  an  i.f.  amplifier) 

calibrated  loop  antenna 


Fig.  7.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  radiated  adjacent  channel  power. 


9.6     Cabinet  radiation 

9.6. 1     Definition  and  methods  of  measurement  of  cabinet  radiation 

Methods  of  measurement  of  cabinet  radiation  of  small  and  medium-sized  transmitters  are 

given  in  I  EC  244-6.  These  methods  of  measurement  are  not  applicable  to  transmitters  with 

integral  antennas. 

Note.  —  IEC  244-6  describes  two  different  methods,  one  for  measurements  at  a  distance  of  3  m  (in  accordance  with 
CISPR  13),  and  the  other  for  measurements  at  a  distance  of  30  m,  both  being  appropriate  for  frequencies 
between  about  27  MHz  and  1 000  MHz.  A  separate  method,  also  suitable  for  frequencies  above  1  GHz,  is 
under  oonsideration. 


25 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

1 0.  Input  power  and  overall  efficiency 

10.1  Input  power 

10.1.1  Definition 

The  input  power  is  the  power  delivered  to  the  transmitter  under  specified  conditions  of 
operation  and  modulation,  including  the  power  absorbed  by  ancillary  equipment  required  for 
normal  operation. 

10.1.2  Method  of  measurement 

The  input  power  for  frequency  or  phase  modulated  equipment  shall  be  measured  without 
modulation. 

For  amplitude-modulated  equipment,  the  input  power  shall  be  measured  at  specified 
amplitude  deviation(s). 

1 0.2  Overall  efficiency 

10.2.1      Definition 

The  overall  efficiency  is  the  ratio  of  the  carrier  power  to  the  input  power.  It  is  usually 
expressed  as  a  percentage. 
Note.  —  For  amplitude  modulation,  the  amplitude  deviation  shall  be  specified. 

1 1 .  Inter-transmitter  intermodulation 

11.1  Definition 

Intermodulation  between  transmitters  is  the  process  by  which  intermodulation  products 
are  generated  in  a  transmitter's  output  circuits  due  to  the  presence  of  an  unwanted  signal  from 
another  transmitter. 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  inter-transmitter  intermodulation  is  expressed  in  terms  of 
the  ratio,  in  decibels,  of  the  value  specified  for  the  interfering  power  which  is  incident  upon 
the  output  of  the  disturbed  transmitter  to  the  power  of  the  third-order  intermodulation 
product. 
Note.  —  This  ratio  is  sometimes  known  as  the  "transmitter  intermodulation  conversion  loss*. 

1 1 .2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  shown  in  figure  8,  page  33. 

Note.  —  The  impedance  of  all  components  in  the  measuring  arrangement  (with  the  possible  exception  of  the 
output  impedance  of  the  transmitter  under  test)  shall  be  the  same  as  the  characteristic  i  mpedance  of  the 
measuring  arrangement  transmission  line. 

The  directional  couplers  shall  be  used  to  measure  the  incident  and  the  reflected  powers,  and  to  make 
certain  that  there  is  not  a  gross  mismatch  between  the  test  load  and  the  measuring  arrangement. 

b)  Operate  the  transmitter  without  modulation  at  rated  power  output  and  adjust  the  selective 
voltmeter  (3)  for  maximum  indication  at  the  operating  frequency  of  the  transmitter. 
Record  the  carrier  level  with  switch  (4)  in  position  A. 

c)  Adjust  the  frequency  of  the  radio-frequency  test  signal  source  (9)  to  a  frequency  100  kHz 
above  the  operating  frequency  of  the  transmitter. 

d)  Change  the  switch  (4)  to  position  B.  Adjust  the  selective  voltmeter  for  maximum  reading  at 
the  frequency  of  the  radio-frequency  test  signal  source  (9)  and  adjust  the  test  signal  level  to 
produce  a  value  30  dB  below  the  level  recorded  in  step  b). 

Note.  —  In  some  cases  it  will  be  difficult  in  step  d)  to  generate  a  level  30  dB  below  that  recorded  in  step  b).  Since 
results  are  not  appreciably  affected  by  the  test  signal  leve  he  measurement  can  be  performed  at  a 
lower  level,  for  example  40  dB  below  that  recorded  in  step  b).  The  exact  level  shall  be  stated  in  the  test 
report. 

26 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

e)  With  the  switch  (4)  in  position  A  and  the  transmitter  operating  at  rated  power,  adjust  the 
selective  voltmeter  for  maximum  reading  at  the  frequency  of  the  third-order  intermodu- 
lation  product  which  is  100  kHz  below  the  transmitter  operating  frequency. 

f)  Adjust  the  line  stretcher  (5)  until  the  maximum  level  of  the  intermodulation  product  is 
obtained. 

g)  Repeat  step  d)  and  record  the  level  of  the  signal  from  the  radio-frequency  test  signal 
source. 

h)  Repeat  step  ejand  record  the  level  of  the  intermodulation  product. 

i)  Change  the  switch  (4)  to  position  B  and  note  the  reading  of  the  selective  voltmeter.  A  level 
less  than  10  dB  lower  than  that  measured  in  step  h)  indicates  a  source  of  intermodulation 
other  than  the  transmitter  under  test,  for  example  the  radio-frequency  test  signal  source  (9) 
or  the  circulator  (7).  This  shall  be  eliminated  and  step  h)  must  then  be  repeated. 


oL J 


M  dBW  WM 

N,dBA   s     jAN 


B.         A 


1  -  transmitter  under  test 

2  -  two  calibrated  directional  couplers 

(see  notes  1  and  2) 

3  -  selective  voltmeter 

4  —  switch 

5  -  line  stretcher  (see  note  3) 

6  -  attenuator  (if  needed) 

7  —  circulator 

8  -  test  load 

9  -  radio-frequency  test  signal  source 

10  -  Faraday  cage  (if  needed) 

11  -  attenuator  (if  needed) 

Notes  1.  -  MdB  is  the  coupling  loss,  typically  20  dB,  and  NdB  is  the  directivity,  typically  40  dB. 

2.  -  A  dual  directional  coupler  can  be  used  in  lieu  of  the  two  directional  couplers.  Alternatively,  it  is  possible 

to  use  a  single  directional  coupler  rotated  to  measure  power  from  either  direction,  thereby  making  the 
switch  (4)  unnecessary. 

3.  -  A  line  stretcher  is  used  to  maximize  the  intermodulation  distortion. 


Fig.  8.  —  Inter-transmitter  intermodulation  measuring  arrangement. 


27 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2  (  1991  ) 

j)  The  ratio,  in  decibels,  of  the  level  of  the  unwanted  signal  measured  in  step  g)  to  the  level  of 
the  intermodulation  product  measured  in  step  h)is  the  inter-transmitter  intermodulation. 

Note.  -  The  method  of  measurement  can  be  used  for  other  frequency  spacings  and  levels  of  the  radio-frequency 
test  signal  source  (9).  The  selective  voltmeter  (3)  shall  have  a  selectivity  sufficiently  high  so  as  not  to  be 
influenced  by  the  carrier  level  when  measuring  the  intermodulation  product. 


12.     Modulation  characteristic 

12.1  Definition 

The  modulation  characteristic  is  the  change  of  the  transmitter  output-signal  deviation  as  a 
function  of  the  modulating  frequency. 

12.2  Method  of  measurement  for  amplitude  or  frequency  modulation 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  9,  page  35. 

b)  Set  the  audio-frequency  generator  (2)  to  1 000  Hz  and  adjust  its  output  level  to  obtain  30% 
of  the  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation,  or  a  modulation  depth  of 
30%. 

c)  While  maintaining  the  output  level  of  the  generator  (2)  established  in  step  b),  vary  the 
frequency  over  the  specified  range  and  record  the  deviation  at  each  frequency. 

1 2.3  Method  of  measurement  for  phase  modulation 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  9. 

b)  Set  the  frequency  of  the  generator  (2)  to  1 000  Hz  and  adjust  its  output  level  to  obtain  30% 
of  the  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation. 

c)  While  maintaining  the  output  level  of  the  generator  (2)  established  in  step  b),  vary  the 
frequency  over  the  specified  range  below  1000  Hz  and  record  the  deviation  at  each 
frequency. 

d)  While  maintaining  the  deviation  established  in  step  b),  vary  the  audio-frequency  over  the 
specific  range  above  1 000  Hz  and  record  the  output  level  of  the  generator  at  each  fre- 
quency. Calculate  the  deviation  for  the  generator  (2)  level  established  in  step  b). 


28 


IS   10820  (Part2):  1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 


1 

< 

» 

i « 

iri 

A             3 

m 

4L 

G 

s 

4 

6 

■0 

Legend 

1  -  transmitter  under  test 

2  -  audio-frequency  generator 

3  —  coupler/attenuator 

4  -  test  toad 


5  -  modulation  monitor 

6  —  de-emphasis  network  and 

band-limiting  niter 

7  -  distortion  factor  meter 


Note.  — 


There  is  ambiguity  in  this  method  of  measurement  depending  upon  whether  de-emphasis  and/or  limiting  is 
used  in  the  modulation  system.  For  example: 

a)  if  the  maximum  permissible  frequency  deviation  is  5  kHz  for  any  modulating  frequency,  then  30%  is 
1.5  kHz  and  the  audio-frequency  signal  level  that  produces  1.5  kHz  at  1 000  Hz  is  the  reference  signal 
level; 

b)  if  the  maximum  permissible  frequency  deviation  is  5  kHz  at  a  modulating  frequency  of  3  000  Hz  and  if 
de-emphasis  and/or  limiting  is  not  employed,  the  resulting  deviation  at  a  modulating  frequency  of 
1  000  Hz  is: 

1000 


5  kHz  x 


3000 


1.66  kHz 


then  30%  of  the  deviation  for  a  modulating  frequency  of  1 000  Hz  is  500  Hz. 
The  intention  of  this  method  of  measurement  is  to  prevent  limiting  or  inadequate  signal-to-noise  ratios 
over  the  audio-frequency  band  to  be  measured.  Either  of  the  two  methods  cited  may  be  useful,  but 
alternative  a)  is  preferred. 

Fig.  9.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  modulation. 


12.4     Presentation  of  results 

Plot  the  deviation  obtained  in  12.2  and  12.3  on  the  linear  ordinate  versus  audio-frequency 
on  the  logarithmic  abscissa.  The  input  signal  level  shall  be  stated. 

Alternatively,  the  deviations  may  be  plotted  as  variations  from  a  specified  characteristic. 


29 


IS  10820  (Part 2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2(1991  ) 

1 3.     Total  distortion  factor  (of  a  sine-wave  at  audio  frequencies) 

13.1  Definition 

The  ratio,  expressed  as  a  percentage,  of  the  r.m.s.  value  of  a  distorted  sinusoidal  signal 
without  its  fundamental  component,  to  the  r.m.s.  value  of  the  complete  signal.  The  distorted 
sinusoidal  signal  includes  harmonically  related  components,  supply  ripple  and  non-harmoni- 
cally  related  components. 

13.2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  9,  page  35. 

b)  Adjust  the  audio-frequency  generator  (2)  to  produce  standard  test  modulation. 

c)  Mesure  the  total  distortion  factor  with  a  distortion  factor  meter  (7)  connected  to  tiie  output 
of  a  modulation  monitor  (5)  or  a  separate  demodulator.  The  equipment  used  for 
measuring  the  distortion  shall  be  preceded  by  a  network  having  the  appropriate 
de-emphasis  characteristic  and  by  the  band-limiting  filter  described  in  appendix  A. 

If  required,  the  measurement  may  be  repeated  with  other  values  for  the  modulating 
frequency,  with  the  same  or  other  constant  values  for  the  resultant  modulation  level. 


1 4.     Relative  audio-frequency  intermodutation  product  level 

14.1  Definition 

The  ratio,  expressed  in  decibels,  of: 

a)  the  level  of  an  unwanted,  non-harmonic  component  present  in  the  linearly  demodulated 
output  signal,  as  a  result  of  transmitter  non-linearity  when  two  specified  signals  are 
applied  to  the  input, 

to 

b)  the  level  of  the  wanted,  lower  frequency,  output  signal. 

14.2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  shown  in  figure  10,  page  37. 

b)  In  the  absence  of  an  output  from  the  audio-frequency  generator  (2),  adjust  the  audio- 
frequency generator  (1)  to  obtain  a  modulation  depth  of  30%  or  30%  of  the  maximum 
permissible  frequency  (or  phase)  deviation  at  a  modulating  frequency  F\  of  1 000  Hz. 

Record  the  output  ievei  of  the  generator  (1). 

c)  Reduce  the  output  of  the  generator  (1)  to  zero  and  adjust  the  output  of  the  generator  (2)  to 
obtain  a  modulation  depth  of  30%  or  30%  of  the  maximum  permissible  frequency  (or 
phase)  deviation  at  a  modulating  frequency  Fi  of  1 600  Hz. 

d)  Restore  the  output  of  the  generator  (1)  to  the  value  recorded  in  step  b). 

e)  With  the  selective  voltmeter,  measure  the  level  of  each  of  the  unwanted  intermodulation 
products  and  of  the  wanted  1 000  Hz  component  at  the  output  of  the  modulation  monitor 
(7). 

f)  Correct  the  results  to  compensate  for  the  amplitude-frequency  response  of  the  modulation 
monitor. 


30 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2  (  1991  ) 

g)  Calculate  and  record  the  ratio,  in  decibels,  of  each  of  the  intermodulation  product  levels 
corrected  as  in  step/)  to  the  level  of  the  1 000  Hz  component. 

Notes  1.  —  The  audio-frequency  bandwith  should  be  limited  in  accordance  with  appendix  A  of  this  standard. 

2.  —  This  method  of  measurement  is  valid  for  other  modulating  frequencies  and  other  values  of 

deviation. 

3.  —  To  ascertain  that  the  two  audio-frequency  sources  do  not,  by  insufficient  decoupling,  produce 

intermodulation   products   which   could   have   a   detrimental   effect   on   the   accuracy   of  the 
measurement,  it  is  recommended  that  the  following  test  be  carried  out: 

Modify  the  arrangement  of  figure  10  by  connecting  the  audio-frequency  selective  voltmeter  (8) 
to  (he  output  of  the  combining  unit  (4)  to  measure  the  relative  intermodulation  product  levels. 
These  should  be  appreciably  less  than  the  relative  level  specified  for  the  transmitter  subjected 
to  the  test  (—50  dB  for  instance  if  the  specified  level  for  the  transmitter  is  — 40  dB). 

4.  —  The  relative  levels  for  the  intermodulation  products  introduced  by  the  modulation  monitor  (7) 

should  be  appreciably  less  than  the  relative  level  for  the  transmitter  subjected  to  the  test. 


0 

3 

/ 

/rfB 

6 

4 

J 

1 

( 

J7 

2 

C 

■5> 

& 

7 

1  -  audio-frequency  generator  No.  1 

2  —  audio-frequency  generator  No.  2 

3  —  transmitter  under  test 

4  —  audio-frequency  combining  unit 

5  -  test  load 

6  «■  coupler/attenuator 

7  —  modulation  monitor 

8  -  audio-frequency  selective  voltmeter 

9  -  audio-frequency  voltmeter 

Fig.  10.  —  Example  of  an  arrangement  for  measuring  relative  audio-frequency  inter- 
modulation product  level. 


14.3     Presentation  of  results 

List  the  ratios  recorded  in  step  g)  of  14.2  in  a  table,  showing  the  frequencies  at  which  they 
occur.  State  whether  pre-emphasis  has  been  incorporated  in  the  transmitters. 

Note.  —  The  intended  transmission  system  characteristics,  for  example  any  pre-emphasis  and  de-emphasis,  should 
be  taken  into  account  in  interpreting  the  results. 

1 5.     Modulation  limiting 

15.1     Definition 

Modulation  limiting  is  the  process,  usually  accomplished  in  the  audio-frequency  stages, 
that  prevents  the  modulation  from  exceeding  the  maximum  permissible  deviation. 


31 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2  (  1991  ) 

1 5 .2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  9,  page  35. 

b)  Adjust  the  audio-frequency  generator  (2)  to  produce  the  standard  test  modulation. 

c)  Increase  the  input  signal  level  by  a  specified  amount,  e.g.  10  dB,  in  one  step. 

d)  Record  the  steady-state  deviation. 

e)  With  the  input  maintained  at  the  value  established  in  step  c),  vary  the  audio-frequency  over 
a  specified  frequency  range  and  record  the  steady-state  deviation  at  each  frequency. 

15.3  Presen  ta  tion  of  results 

Plot  the  deviation  on  the  linear  ordinate  of  a  graph  and  the  modulating  frequency  on  the 
logarithmic  abscissa. 

1 6.     Residua]  modulation  (due  to  hum  and  noise) 

1 6. 1  Residual  frequency  modulation 

16.1.1  Definition 

t-i : a i  e ~. .  _~  j..i„»:~_  ~r*u-.  .:...i  „»  >i..  ~. .♦_...  „r*u„  *_„ „:*»„   a..~  »a  u.._ 

i  ut  lEaiuuai  iic^utiiv^ji  uiuuuiauuii  ui  tut  aigucu  ai  uic  uuijjui  ui  mc  iianaiiiiLiti,  uul  iu  iiuiii 

and  noise,  is  the  frequency  modulation  in  the  absence  of  any  external  modulating  signal.  It  is 
expressed  as  the  ratio  in  decibels  of  the  output  voltages  of  the  modulation  monitor  with  and 
without  external  modulation. 

Note.  —  Some  specifications  may  require  the  measuring  equipment  to  be  preceded  by  a  band-limiting  filter.  See 
section  one. 

16.1.2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  1 1,  page  39. 

b)  With  the  switch  in  the  calibrate  position,  adjust  the  frequency-modulated  signal  generator 
(4)  to  a  radio  frequency  equal  to  the  nominal  frequency  of  the  transmitter  under  test  and 
at  a  level  of  60  dBuV.  Modulate  the  generator  with  1000  Hz  at  a  frequency  deviation  of 
1000  Hz. 

c)  Record  the  level  Uc  indicated  on  the  r.m.s.  voltmeter  (8). 

d)  Switch  the  input  of  the  FM  monitor  to  the  unmodulated  transmitter  under  test  and  adjust 
its  level  to  approximately  60  dBu.V. 

e)  Record  the  residual  noise  and  hum  level  (/indicated  on  the  r.m.s.  voltmeter  (8). 

16.1.3.     Presentation  of  results 

Calculate  the  residual  frequency  modulation,  N,  expressed  as  a  ratio,  in  decibels,  relative  to 
the  deviation  of  1000  Hz,  from  the  formula: 

N=201og  — (dB) 

1 6.2  Residual  amplitude  modulation 

16.2.1      Definition 

The  amplitude  modulation  in  the  absence  of  any  external  modulating  signal.  It  is  expressed 
as  the  ratio,  in  decibels,  of  the  output  voltages  of  the  amplitude  modulation  monitor  with  and 
without  external  modulation. 

Note.  —  Some  specifications  may  require  the  measuring  equipment  to  be  preceded  by  a  band-limiting  filter.  See 
section  one. 


32 


IS  10820  {Part  2) :  1996 
ISO  489-2  (  1991  ) 

16.2.2     Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  the  equipment  as  illustrated  in  figure  11. 

b)  With  the  switch  in  the  calibrate  position,  adjust  the  AM  signal  generator  (1)  to  a  radio 
frequency  equal  to  the  nominal  frequency  of  the  transmitter  under  test.  Adjust  its  level  to 
obtain  a  reference  deflection  on  the  d.c.  component  meter  (3). 

c)  Modulate  the  AM  generator  ( 1 )  with  1000  Hz  to  a  depth  of  60%. 


Legend 

1  —  amplitude-modulated  signal  generator 

2  -  amplitude-modulation  monitor 

3  -  d.c.  component  meter 

4  -  frequency-modulated  signal  generator 

5  -  frequency-modulation  monitor 

6  —  transmitter  under  test 

7  -  band-limiting  filter 

8  -  true  r.m.s.  voltmeter  (a.c.  coupled) 


Fig.  11.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  residual  modulation. 


d)  Record  the  level  Uc  indicated  on  the  r.m.s.  voltmeter. 

e)  Switch  the  input  of  the  AM  monitor  (2)  to  the  unmodulated  transmitter  under  test.  Adjust 
the  level  of  this  signal  until  the  d.c.  component  meter  indicates  the  same  reference 
deflection  as  noted  in  step  b).  Record  the  residual  noise  and  hum  level  U  indicated  on  the 
r.m.s.  meter. 

16.2.3     Presentation  of  results 

Calculate  the  AM  noise  and  hum  level,  N,  expressed  as  a  ratio  in  decibels,  to  a  modulation 
depth  of  60%  from  the  formula: 

U 
W«201og  — (dB) 

Uc 


33 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2  ( 1991 ) 

1 7.     Transmitter  attack  time 

17.1  Definition 

The  transmitter  attack  time  is  the  elapsed  time  from: 

1)  the  instant  of  changing  the  state  of  the  transmitter  from  standby  to  transmit, 
until 

2)  the  instant  at  which  the  unmodulated  carrier  power  reaches  a  value  which  is  3  dB  below  the 
steady-state  value. 

17.2  Method  of  measurement 

a)  Connect  an  oscilloscope,  having  a  calibrated  horizontal  scan,  in  parallel  with  the  test  load 
to  display  the  envelope  of  the  transmitter  output  signal. 

b)  Simultaneously,  initiate  the  transmit  function  and  trigger  the  horizontal  scan  of  the 
oscilloscope.  Initiation  of  the  transmit  function  may  be  by  a  voice-operated  device. 

c)  The  transmitter  attack  time  is- the  elapsed  time  from  the  instant  of  initiating  the  transmit 
function  until  the  envelope  displayed  on  the  oscilloscope  reaches  70.7%  of  its  steady-state 
value. 


I 8.    Transmitter  performance  under  conditions  deviating  from  standard  test  cond  itions 

The  performance  of  the  transmitter  can  be  evaluated  under  conditions  deviating  from 
standard  test  conditions. 

The  performance  characteristics  and  the  external  conditions  at  which  the  measurements  are 
made  shall  be  those  explicitly  specified  for  this  purpose  in  the  equipment  specification.  The 
results  can  be  compared  with  those  obtained  under  standard  conditions. 

Some  performance  characteristics  may  reach  a  maximum  degradation  at  some  intermediate 
external  condition  and  not  necessarily  at  the  extreme. 

1 8. 1  Initial  measurements  under  standard  test  conditions 

Before  beginning  the  tests  described  in  the  following  subclauses,  the  relevant  performance 
characteristics  should  be  evaluated  first  under  the  standard  test  conditions,  in  accordance 
with  the  methods  detailed  in  this  section. 

No  readjustment  of  the  transmitter  shall  be  made  during  the  following  tests. 

1 8.2  Variation  of  supply  voltage 

The  required  characteristics  shall  be  measured  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section 
eight  of  IEC  489-1. 

1 8.3  Variation  of  ambient  temperature 

The  measurements  shall  be  made  under  the  environmental  conditions  specified  in  section 
eight  of  IEC  489-1,  with  the  following  additional  requirements. 

18.3.1     Cold 

After  the  equipment  has  been  switched  on,  the  required  characteristics  shall  be  measured, 
unless  otherwise  specified,  after  a  1 5  min  standby  warm-up,  except  for  the  frequency  error 
which  may  be  measured  after  the  period  of  time  stated  in  the  equipment  specification. 


34 


IS  10820(Part2):1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

18.3.2     Dry  heat 

After  the  equipment  has  been  switched  on,  the  required  characteristics  shall  be  measured 
after  a  15  min  standby  warm-up,  except  for  the  frequency  error  and  the  carrier  power,  unless 
otherwise  specified,  which  shall  be  determined  at  intervals  as  stated  in  the  equipment  specifi- 
cation. 

1 8.4  Variation  of  relative  humidity 

The  required  characteristics  shall  be  measured  under  the  environmental  conditions 
specified  in  section  eight  of  IEC  489- 1 . 

After  the  equipment  has  been  switched  on,  unless  otherwise  specified,  the  measurements, 
except  for  the  frequency  error,  shall  be  made  after  a  15  min  standby  warm-up.  Unless 
otherwise  specified,  the  frequency  error  shall  be  determined  after  the  minimum  time  stated  in 
the  equipment  specification,  if  this  minimum  time  is  less  than  15  min. 

18.5  Vibration 

For  equipment  intended  to  have  immunity  to  vibration,  the  required  characteristics  shall  be 
measured  after  the  vibration  test  has  been  performed  in  conformity  with  30. 1  of  IEC  489- 1 . 

18.6  Shock 

For  equipment  intended  to  have  immunity  to  shock,  the  required  characteristics  shall  be 
measured  after  the  shock  test  has  been  performed  in  conformity  with  30.2  of  IEC  489-1 . 

18.7  Drop  (free  fall) 

For  personal  equipment  intended  to  have  immunity  to  damage  from  drop,  the  required 
characteristics  shall  be  measured  after  the  drop  test  has  been  performed  in  conformity  with 
30.3  of  IEC  489- 1. 

18.8  Dust  and  sand 

For  equipment  intended  to  have  immunity  to  dust  and  sand,  the  required  characteristics 
shall  be  measured  after  the  dust  and  sand  test  has  been  performed  in  conformity  with  30.4  of 
IEC  489-1. 

18.9  Driving  rain 

For  equipment  intended  to  have  immunity  to  driving  rain  together  with  strong  wind,  the 
required  characteristics  shall  be  measured  after  the  driving  rain  test  has  been  performed  in 
conformity  with  30.5  of  IEC  489-1. 

1 8. 1 0  Corrosion  (salt  fog) 

For  equipment  intended  to  have  immunity  to  corrosion  (salt  fog),  the  required  charac- 
teristics shall  be  measured  after  the  corrosion  test  has  been  performed  in  conformity  with  30.6 
of  IEC  489-1. 


35 


IS  10820  (Part2):  1996 
ISO  489-2  ( 1991  ) 

APPENDIX  A 
RECOMMENDED  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  MEASURING  EQUIPMENT 

Al.     Modulation  monitor 

The  modulation  monitor  shall  be  capable  of  indicating  with  an  accuracy  of  5%: 

a)  the  peak  positive  and  negative  amplitude  deviations  of  the  carrier,  for  amplitude  modu- 
lation measurements, 

and/or 

b)  the  peak  positive  and  negative  frequency  deviation  from  the  carrier  frequency,  for  angle 
modulation  measurements. 

Output  terminals  should  be  provided  for  the  demodulated  signal. 

A2.     True  r.m.s.  voltage  meters 

For  the  measurement  of  the  signal-to-noise  ratio,  the  characteristics  of  the  indicating  meter 
are  important.  In  addition,  for  certain  characteristics,  measurement  of  the  true  r.m.s.  voltage 
is  required. 

A3 .     Distortion-factor  meter  or  SIN  AD  meter 

The  distortion-factor  meter  or  SINAD  meter  shall  have  the  following  characteristics: 

—  The  wide-band  response  shall  not  vary  by  more  than  0.  ldB  over  the  frequency  range  50  Hz 
to  20000  Hz. 

—  The  band  elimination  filter  attenuation  shall  be  at  least  40  dB  at  1 000  Hz,  but  not  more 
than  0.5  dB  between  50  Hz  and  500  Hz,  and  between  2000  Hz  and  20000  Hz. 

If  the  SINAD  meter  has  a  fixed  filter,  it  shall  have  40  dB  attenuation  over  the  frequency 
band  of  980  Hz  to  1 020  Hz. 

—  The  noise  signal  level  from  a  constant  amplitude  noise  source  between  300  Hz  and 
3  000  Hz  shall  not  be  attenuated  by  more  than  1  d  B  by  the  filter. 

—  The  indicator  shall  be  a  true  r.m.s.  type  for  a  crest  factor  of  3  or  less. 

Note.  —  As  a  result  of  the  different  characteristics  of  the  band  elimination  filters,  the  measurement  results 
obtained  with  the  distortion-factor  meter  or  SINAD  meter  specified  above  may  differ  from  those 
obtained  with  the  measuring  equipment  specified  in  the  previous  edition  of  this  standard. 

A4.    Selective  measuring  device 

The  selective  measuring  device  may  be  either  a  frequency  selective  voltmeter,  a  spectrum 
analyzer,  or  a  calibrated  field-strength  meter.  The  bandwidth  of  the  measuring  device  shall  be 
appropriate  for  the  measurement  being  made  or  shall  be  adjusted  to  the  value  stated  in  the 
method  of  measurement. 

A5.     Audio-frequency  band-limiting  filter 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  upper  cut-off  frequency  of  the  audio-frequency  band- 
limiting  filter  shall  be  about  three  times  the  upper  frequency  limit  of  the  band  of  modulation 
frequencies  specified  for  the  transmitter.  The  lower  cut-off  frequency  shall  be  the  lowest 
modulation  frequency  specified,  with  an  allowable  attenuation  of  3  dB  at  the  cut-off 
frequency. 

To  be  effective,  the  attenuation  slope  of  the  filter  shall  be  at  least  12  dB/octave. 


36 


IS   10820  (Part2):  1996 
ISO   489-2  ( 1991  ) 

A6.     Standard  test  receiver 

The  standard  test  receiver  shall  be  designed  to  receive  signals  of  the  emission  class 
produced  by  the  transmitter  under  test.  Its  selectivity,  Type  Bl,  shall  be  measured  according 
to  I  EC  489-3,  except  that  the  unwanted  signal  shall  be  unmodulated. 

The  minimum  selectivity  slope,  between  the  points  where  the  ratios  of  the  unwanted  to  the 
wanted  signals  are  6  dB  and  85  dB,  shall  be  determined  by  the  channel  spacing  as  follows: 

Channel  spacings  Minimum  selectivity  slope 

^15  kHz  12dB/kHz 

>15kHz  6dB/kHz 

The  bandwidth  at  the  unwanted-to-wanted  input  signal  ratio  of  6  dB  shall  be  indicated. 


A7.     Power  measuring  receiver 

The  adjacent-channel  power  of  transmitters  can  be  measured  with  a  power  measuring 
receiver.  Block  diagrams  for  a  measuring  arrangement  which  is  referred  to  as  a  power 
measuring  receiver  are  shown  in  figures  4  and  7,  pages  19  and  31. 

The  power  measuring  receiver  shall  be  capable  of  measuring  the  ratio  of  the  carrier  power 
to  the  adjacent-channel  power  with  an  accuracy  of  ±3  dB.  The  following  characteristics  of  the 
power  measuring  receiver  are  required  to  meet  this  accuracy: 

—  The  measurement  of  the  reference  frequencies  and  the  setting  of  the  local  oscillator  (4A) 
frequency  shall  be  within  ±50  Hz. 

—  The  linearity  of  the  power  measuring  receiver  shall  be  such  that  an  error  in  the  reading  of 
not  more  than  1.5  dB  will  be  obtained  over  an  input  level  variation  of  100  dB. 

—  The  i.f.  attenuator  (4C)  shall  be  adjustable  over  a  range  of  80  dB. 

—  The  combination  of  attenuator  and  meter  shall  permit  0.5  dB  reading  resolution. 

—  The  r.m.s.  meter  shall  have  a  crest  factor  of  at  least  1 0. 

—  Ideally,  the  power  measuring  receiver  should  have  a  rectangular  selectivity  characteristic. 
This  can  be  approached  with  a  power  measuring  receiver  having  an  amplitude  and 
frequency  characteristic  shown  in  figure  A 1  and  in  table  A 1  of  this  appendix. 

—  The  error  due  to  the  noise  of  the  local  oscillator,  of  mixer  (4A)  and  any  amplifiers  shall  be 
less  than  1.3  dB.  This  noise  will  limit  the  maximum  ratio  that  can  be  measured,  e.g.  80  dB 
unless  exceptional  measures  are  taken  to  minimize  the  noise  level. 

The  error  in  the  measurement  due  to  noise  will  be  acceptable  if  the  noise  power  of  the 
power  measuring  receiver  is  less  than  one-fourth  (-6  dB)  of  the  total  power  at  the  output  of 
the  power  measuring  receiver. 

To  verify  that  the  power  measuring  receiver  meets  this  requirement: 

a)  Connect  a  signal  source  having  a  noise  power  density  approximately  140  dB/Hz  (see  note) 
relative  to  the  signal  level  at  the  adjacent-channel  spacing  to  the  input  of  the  power 
measuring  receiver. 

Note.  —  The  maximum  value  of  the  noise  power  density,  expressed  in  decibels/ hertz  relative  to  the  output  power 
of  the  signal  source,  and  which  may  not  be  exceeded  when  a  specific  adjacent-channel  power  ratio  has  to 
be  measured,  is  given  by  the  following  relationship: 

dB/Hz  (signal  source)  -  —  A  —  10  log  B  —  6 


37 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 

where: 

A  is  the  required  adjacent-channel  power  ratio  in  decibels 
B  is  the  power  measuring  receiver  bandwidth  in  hertz 
b)  Measure  the  adjacent-channel  power  of  the  signal  source  as  per  8.5.2  or  9.5.2  of  this 
standard. 

The  greatest  ratio  that  may  be  measured  on  a  transmitter  is  6  dB  less  than  the  value 
measured  in  step  b). 

Table  Al 
Table  for  selectivity  limits  for  power  measuring  receiver 


Point 

Attenu- 
ation 

(dB) 

Displacement  from 
"reference  frequency"** 

Bandwidth  characteristics* 

Tolerances 
(kHz) 

Fitter  6  dB  bandwidth 

Filter  6  dB  bandwidth 

Filter  6  dB  bandwidth 

6-8.5 

14 

16 

6-8.5 

14 

16 

6-8.5 

14 

16 

Dl 

2 

1.25 

3 

3 

6 

8 

10 

±2 

±3 

±3.5 

D2 

6 

0 

0 

0 

8.5 

14 

16 

±2 

±3 

±3.5 

D3 

26 

-1.25 

-1.25 

-1.25 

II 

16.5 

18.5 

±2 

±3 

±3.5 

D4 

90 

-5.25 

-5.25 

-5.25 

19 

24.5 

26.5 

±2 
-6 

+  3 
-7 

*±3.5 
-7.5 

*  Values  usually  specified  in  national  regulations. 
••The  "reference  frequency"  is  the  frequency  at  which  the  attenuation  is  6dB  on  the  side  close  to  the  carrier 
(point  D2). 

Reference  frequency 


Carrier 


kHz 


FlG.  A 1 .   —   Selectivity  limits  for  power  measuring  receiver. 


38 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991) 

A8.     Spectrum  analyzer 

A8. 1     Spectrum  analyzer  for  use  in  the  adjacent  channel  power  measurement 

A  spectrum  analyzer  is  an  equipment  which  allows  the  display  of  the  power  or  the 
amplitude  of  a  signal  versus  frequency. 

Some  spectrum  analyzers  are  equipped  with  digital  sampling  devices.  They  can  digitize  and 
store  values  representing  the  indications  shown  on  the  display.  Typically  up  to  1 000  samples 
are  stored  and  the  data  samples  are  available  for  processing. 

A8.2     Spectrum  analyzer  noise  power  performance 

In  principle,  spectrum  analyzers  have  a  noise  power  sufficiently  low  so  as  not  to  hinder 
adjacent  channel  power  measurements  on  transmitters.  With  any  type  of  spectrum  analyzer, 
the  total  noise  power  due  to  the  spectrum  analyzer  and  the  transmitter  allows  for  measure- 
ments of  adjacent  channel  power  ratios  up  to: 

10  lg  (carrier  power/noise  power  in  the  selected  resolution  bandwidth)  -3  dB. 

where  the  noise  power  in  the  selected  resolution  bandwidth  is  the  sideband  noise  power 
(see  note  below)  of  the  spectrum  analyzer  specified  in  a  1  Hz  bandwidth  centered  on  an 
offset  from  the  carrier  equal  to  the  specified  channel  spacing,  multiplied  by  the  noise 
bandwidth  of  the  selected  resolution  bandwidth  of  the  spectrum  analyzer. 

Note.  —  The  value  of  the  sideband  noise  power  is  normally  given  in  the  technical  specification  of  the 
spectrum  analyzer. 

With  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzers,  the  residual  noise  power  due  to  the  transmitter  is 
taken  into  account  in  the  measurement.  Therefore,  the  noise  power  due  to  the  spectrum 
analyzer  allows  for  measurements  of  adjacent  channel  power  ratios  up  to: 

10  lg  (carrier  power/noise  power  in  the  specified  adjacent  bandwidth)  —3  dB 

where  the  noise  power  in  the  specified  adjacent  bandwidth  is  the  sideband  noise  power  of 
the  spectrum  analyzer  specified  in  a  1  Hz  bandwidth  centred  on  an  offset  from  the  carrier 
equal  to  the  specified  channel  spacing,  multiplied  by  the  specified  bandwidth. 

A8.3     Maximum  adjacent  channel  power  ratio  (digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer) 

Where  the  noise  power  of  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  is  not  specified,  the 
following  measuring  method  can  be  used  to  determine  the  suitability  of  the  analyzer  for 
adjacent  channel  power  ratio  measurement.  The  measurement  method  requires  the  use  of  a 
signal  generator  with  a  specified  noise  power  performance  at  the  carrier  frequency  of  interest 
of  better  than  - 120  dB  (referred  to  the  carrier)/Hz  at  an  offset  equal  to  the  channel  spacing  of 
the  radio  equipment  to  be  tested. 

a)  Connect  the  output  of  the  signal  generator  directly  to  the  input  of  the  digital  storage 
spectrum  analyzer. 

b)  Adjust  the  signal  generator  to  produce  an  unmodulated  output  of  0  dBm  at  a  frequency 
equal  to  that  of  the  transmitter  the  analyzer  will  be  expected  to  measure. 

c)  Adjust  the  spectrum  analyzer  as  follows: 

—  resolution  and  video  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting,  but  not  less  than  the 


39 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991) 

specified  bandwidth  divided  by  200  nor  greater  than  the  specified  bandwidth  divided 
by  40  and  record  this  as  R; 

—  total  swept  bandwidth  to  the  lowest  possible  setting  which  is  equal  to  or  greater  than 
the  specified  bandwidth  and  record  this  as  B; 

—  the  sweep  time  to  greater  than  3  B/R2. 

Note.  —  The  specified  bandwidth  is  that  which  is  applicable  to  the  intended  adjacent  channel  power  ratio 
measurement. 

d)  Adjust  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure 
coincides  with  the  carrier  frequency  of  the  signal  generator. 

e)  Adjust  the  sensitivity  of  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  a  value  which  provides  a 
displayed  figure  on  the  screen  which  is  in  the  linear  range  of  the  spectrum  analyzer. 
Activate  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  record  the  values  Q  in  dBm  for  at  least 
200  samples  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  specified  bandwidth. 

Calculate  and  record  the  indicated  carrier  power  Pc  using  the  following  relationship: 

Pc=  10  lg  J_   10q/l°    dBm 
i-  l 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 

J)  Adjust  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  so  that  the  centre  of  the  displayed  figure 
coincides  with  the  centre  frequency  of  the  upper  adjacent  channel. 

g)  Activate  the  digital  storage  spectrum  analyzer  to  record  the  values  An  in  dBm  for  the  same 
number  of  samples  used  in  step  e)  uniformly  distributed  throughout  the  specified 
bandwidth.  Calculate  and  record  the  indicated  adjacent  channel  power  Pa  using  the 
following  relationship: 

/>a=  10  lg  £   10*         dBm 

i-  I 

where  n  is  the  number  of  samples 
h)  Calculate  the  maximum  adjacent  channel  power  ratio  using  the  following  relationship: 

PR  =  Pc  -  Pa  -  3  dB 

where: 

Pc  is  the  value  recorded  in  step  e) 

Pa  is  the  value  recorded  in  step  g) 

Where  the  maximum  adjacent  channel  power  ratio  calculated  in  step  h)  exceeds  the  limit 
measurement  requirement  for  adjacent  channel  power  ratio,  then  the  digital  storage 
spectrum  analyzer  measurement  method  may  be  used. 


40 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991) 


APPENDIX  B 


GUIDE  FOR  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  A  30  m  RADIATION  TEST  SITE  FOR 
EQUIPMENT  EMITTING  RADIO-FREQUENCY  ELECTROMAGNETIC  ENERGY 


Emission  measurements  can  be  made  for  all  radio-frequency  parameters  pertaining  to  radiated 
radio-frequency  electromagnetic  energy,  for  example,  transmitter  radiated  power,  transmittei 
radiated  spurious  power,  receiver  radiated  spurious  power. 


B 1 .     Test  site  characteristics 

Limits 

Useful  frequency  range:  25  MHz  to  1 000  MHz 

Nominal  site  attenuation:  20  dB  to  46  dB  for  25  MHz 

52  dB  to  78  dB  for  1000  MHz 

Note.  —  The  nominal  attenuation  of  the  test  site  for  a  half-wave  dipole  is  26 dB  for  25  MHz  and  58  dB  for 
1 000  MHz.  The  actual  attenuation  may  vary  due  to  ground  reflections. 

Limits 

Equipment  size:  6  m  maximum,  excluding  the  antenna 

Radiation  angle:  Only  apply  to  the  horizontal  plane 


B2.     Radiation  test  site 

The  radiation  test  site  shall  be  on  level  ground  having  uniform  electrical  characteristics  and 
be  free  from  reflecting  objects  over  as  wide  an  area  as  possible  to  ensure  that  extraneous 
electromagnetic  fields  do  not  affect  the  accuracy  of  the  test  results. 

The  minimum  boundary  of  the  test  site  shall  be  an  ellipse  having  a  60  m  major  axis  and  a 
52  m  minor  axis.  The  equipment  under  test  and  the  transmitting  antenna  shall  be  located  at 
the  foci. 

No  extraneous  conducting  objects  having  any  dimension  in  excess  of  15  cm  for  measure- 
ments over  the  frequency  range  of  25  MHz  to  300  MHz,  or  5  cm  for  measurements  over  the 
frequency  range  of  300  MHz  to  1  GHz,  shall  be  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  equipment 
under  test  or  the  transmitting  antenna. 

The  distance  between  the  vertical  axis  through  the  centre  of  the  antenna  of  the  equipment 
under  test  and  the  vertical  axis  through  the  centre  of  the  transmitting  antenna  shall  be  30  m. 

All  test  equipment  if  located  above  ground  shall  preferably  be  powered  by  batteries.  If  the 
equipment  is  powered  from  the  mains,  each  of  the  mains  supply  cables  shall  be  provided  with 
a  suitable  radio  frequency  filter.  The  cable  connecting  the  filter  and  the  measuring  equipment 
shall  be  screened  and  shall  be  as  short  as  possible.  The  cable  connecting  the  filter  and  the 
supply  mains  shall  be  either  screened  and  be  at  ground  level,  or  shall  be  buried  to  a  depth  of 
approximately  30  cm. 


B3.     Position  of  the  equipment  under  test  (see  figure  B 1 ,  page  49) 

A  pedestal  shall  be  placed  on  a  turntable  so  that  the  pedestal's  upper  horizontal  surface  is 
1 .5  m  above  ground.  The  equipment  under  test  in  the  cabinet  or  housing  in  which  it  normally 
operates  shall  be  placed  on  the  upper  horizontal  surface  of  the  pedestal.  Both  the  turntable 
and  the  pedestal  shall  be  made  of  non-conducting  materials. 


41 


IS  10820  (Part 2)  :  1996 
ISO   489-2  (1991  ) 

For  equipment  having  an  integral  antenna,  place  the  equipment  on  the  pedestal  in  a 
position  which  is  closest  to  its  position  in  normal  use. 

For  equipment  having  a  rigid  external  integral  antenna,  mount  the  equipment  so  that  the 
antenna  is  in  a  vertical  position. 

For  equipment  having  a  non-rigid  external  integral  antenna,  mount  the  antenna  vertically 
with  a  non-conducting  support 

If  the  equipment  has  a  power  cable,  it  should  extend  down  to  the  turntable,  and  any  excess 
cable  length  should  be  coiled  on  the  turntable. 

B4.     Measuring  antenna  support 

The  measuring  antenna  support  shall  consist  of  a  horizontal  boom  supported  by  a  vertical 
mast,  both  made  of  non-conducting  materials.  The  boom  shall  project  at  least  1  m  from  the 
vertical  mast  in  the  direction  of  the  equipment  under  test  and  shall  be  arranged  so  that  it  may 
be  raised  and  lowered  between  1  m  and  4  m. 

B5.     Measuring  antenna 

The  measuring  antenna  shall  be  suitable  for  the  reception  of  linearly  polarized  waves.  It 
may  consist  of  a  half-wave  dipole,  the  length  of  which  is  adjusted  for  the  frequency 
concerned.  For  practical  reasons,  however,  or  to  increase  the  sensitivity  of  the  measurements, 
it  may  be  preferable  to  use  a  number  of  separate  fixed  broadband  dipoles  or  more  complex 
antennas. 

The  measuring  antenna  shall  be  mounted  at  the  end  of  a  horizontal  boom.  The  mounting 
shall  permit  the  antenna  to  be  positioned  for  measuring  both  the  horizontal  and  the  vertical 
components  of  the  electrical  field.  The  lower  end  of  the  antenna  when  oriented  for  vertical 
polarization  and  placed  in  its  lowest  position  shall  be  at  least  0.3  m  above  the  ground. 

The  cable  from  the  antenna  shall  be  routed  along  the  horizontal  boom  for  at  least  3  m  and 
should  preferably  extend,  while  being  at  ground  level,  at  least  3  m  beyond  the  minimum 
boundary  of  the  test  site  before  it  is  connected  to  the  selective  measuring  device.  Alternatively, 
the  cable  may  be  routed  underground. 

B6.     Auxiliary  antenna 

The  auxiliary  antenna  replaces  the  equipment  under  test  during  part  of  the  measurement. 
The  auxiliary  antenna  shall  be  a  half-wave  dipole  and  shall  be  arranged  in  a  manner  similar  to 
that  of  the  measuring  antenna,  except  that  the  centre  of  the  auxiliary  antenna  should  coincide 
approximately  with  the  normal  position  of  the  centre  of  radiation  of  the  equipment  under  test. 

At  frequencies  below  about  60  MHz,  the  above  condition  is  impossible  to  achieve  when  the 
antenna  is  arranged  for  vertical  polarization.  In  this  case,  the  lower  end  of  the  dipole  shall  be 
placed  0.3  m  above  ground. 

B7.     Radio-frequency  signal  generator 

A  well-shielded  radio-frequency  signal  generator,  with  a  matching  or  combining  network 
(if  required)  and  its  associated  output  cable,  shall  be  placed  in  a  position  such  that  it  wili  not 
affect  the  accuracy  of  the  test  results  and  shall  be  connected  and  matched  to  the  auxiliary 
antenna. 

B8.     Selective  measuring  device 

The  selective  measuring  device  may  be  either  a  frequency  selective  voltmeter,  a  spectrum 
analyzer  or  a  calibrated  field-strength  meter,  and  shall  be  placed,  together  with  its  associated 
input  cable,  in  a  position  such  that  it  shall  not  affect  the  accuracy  of  the  test  results. 


42 


\l/ 

Y 


1.5  m 


C& 


IS   10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO    489-2  (  1991  ) 


30  m 


>    1  m 


V 


1-4  ±  0.2  m 


i        r     i      i      i 

0.2  m    f — |  | 1 


k> 


>  1  m 


rJj 


V 


I 1         I 1 

M    r— I    I 

I I         I I 


Fig.  Bla 


30  m 


^  1  m 
-•H     I— »■ 


*T> 


y 


1-4  ±  0.2  m  h— | 


1 


l 1 


I I 


1         7  -i 

M        I 1        ! 

i i         i i 


Fig.  Bib 


Legend 

1  -  equipment  under  test 

2  —  selective  measuring  device 

3  **  measuring  antenna 

4  -  auxiliary  antenna 

5  -  radio-frequency  signal  generator 

6  —  selective  measuring  device 

7  -  optional  calibrated  attenuator  for  measuring 

the  effective  radiated  power,  or  fundamental 
oscillation  rejection  filter  for  measuring 
non-essential  emissions 


Fig.  Bl.  —  Measuring    arrangement    for   equipment    emitting    radio-frequency    electro- 
magnetic energy  (30  m). 


43 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2  (1991  ) 

APPENDIX  C 

EXAMPLE  OF  A  MAINS  POWER  LINE  IMPEDANCE  STABILIZATION  NETWORK 

CI.     Introduction 

A  mains  power  line  impedance  stabilization  network  (also  known  as  artificial  mains 
network)  is  required  to  provide  defined  impedances  at  high  frequencies  between  the  mains 
terminals  of  the  transmitters  and  between  each  of  these  terminals  and  earth.  The  network  also 
provides  a  suitable  filter  to  isolate  the  transmitter  circuit  from  unwanted  radio-frequency 
voltages  that  may  be  present  on  the  supply  mains. 

The  impedance  of  this  filter  section  at  the  measuring  frequency  shall  be  sufficiently  high  for 
the  combination  of  filter  and  associated  network  as  represented  in  figure  CI,  page  52,  to  give 
an  impedance  having  a  modulus  of  150  ±20  Q  and  a  phase  angle  not  exceeding  20°,  both 
between  the  terminals  of  the  transmitter  and,  between  these  two  terminals  connected  together, 
and  earth. 

The  symmetrical  voltage  is  the  voltage  appearing  between  terminals  A  and  B  (see  figure 
CI). 

The  asymmetrical  voltage  is  the  voltage  appearing  between  terminal  C  and  the  earth  (see 
figure  CI). 

These  voltages  may  be  represented  in  a  theoretical  vector  diagram  as  indicated  in  figure  C2, 
page  52. 

C2.     Method  of  measuring  interference  voltage 

For  practical  measurements,  a  mains  power  line  impedance  stabilization  network,  similar 
to  the  example  given  in  figure  C3,  page  52,  may  be  used.  This  network  is  suitable  for 
measuring  both  symmetrical  (position  1  of  switch  S)  and  asymmetrical  (position  2  of  switch  S) 
components,  with  an  unbalanced  selective  voltmeter. 


44 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 


Table  CI 


Resistance,  attenuation  and  impedance  values  of  the  artificial  mains  network  of  figure 
three  different  input  impedances,  Z,  of  the  measuring  equipment 

C3,  page  52  (note  1),  for 

Z-50O 

Z-60O 

Z-750 

Resistance  (nole  2) 

Ri   -Ri 

Ri  -Rs 

R* 

Re  -  R? 
Rg  —  R<> 

Rio  ~  Rn 
Rn 

118.7(120)0 
152.9(150)0 
390.7(390)0 
275.7(270)0 
22.8   (22)  O 
107.8(110)0 
50  O 

112.2(110)0 
169.7(160)0 
483.9(470)0 
230.3(220)0 
27.6   (27)  O 
129.1(130)0 
60  O 

107.1(110)0 
187.5(180)0 
621.4(620)0 
187.5(180)0 
34.5    (36)  O 
161.3(150)0 
75  O 

Attenuation  (note  3) 

Symmetrical  AlyTa 
Asymmetrical  /tuym 

20(20)    dB 
20(19.9)dB 

20  (19.7)  dB 
20(19.8)  dB 

20(19.8)dB 
20(20)    dB 

Artificial  mains  network  impedance  (note  3) 

r 

Symmetrical  Z$ym 
Asymmetrical  Zuym 

150(150)0 
150(148)0 

150(145.7)0 
150(143.4)0 

150(151.2)0 
150(145.2)0 

Notes  1.  -  The  ratio  of  turns  of  the  balanced  to  unbalanced  transformer  in  figure  C3  is  assumed  to  be 

v^    .  ,. 

- —  with  centre  tap. 
1 

2.  -  Resistance  values  shown  in  brackets  are  the  nearest  preferred  values  (tolerance  ±  5%). 

J.  -  Values  shown  in  brackets  are  calculated,  using  the  preferred  resistance  values  nearest  to  the  theoretical 
values. 

Allowance  shall  be  made  for  the  attenuation  introduced  by  this  network.  For  all  pertinent 
values,  refer  to  figure  C3  and  table  CI  in  this  appendix. 

An  additional  filter  section  may  be  required  in  the  case  where  mains-borne  radio-frequency 
interference  influences  the  measurements  to  a  substantial  extent. 


45 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2  (  1991  ) 


Mains 


Radio-frequency 
isolating  filter 


0,1  ixF 


300  a 


;£— 


i 


30on 


ioon 

~£ o  C         Transmitter 


ioon 


T1_JTL 
0,1  txF  =}= 


-OB 


J64/R/ 


FlG.  CI.   —  Mains  power  line  impedance  stabilization  network  (also  known  as  artificial 
mains  network). 


220177 


Fig.  C2.  —  Vector  diagram  of  interference  voltages. 


L 

L 

j^ry 

- 

=aC 

t 

i_ 

Additional 
filter  sections 
if  required 

i 

r 

■ 

■fTdCZ} 


«1 


i^rpi       ||      Tr r 


«. 


xi bri 


20  R  . 


f!7        ft,, 


-HZZZh^  4-  AUs         J 

fl,  ^° 

— ©2  -» 


t& 


X 


Legend 

P  —  connections  for  transmitters 

1  -  symmetrical  component 

2  -  asymmetrical  component 


Measuring  set 


CEhtS 


FlG.  C3.   —   Example  of  a  mains  power  line  impedance  stabilization  network. 


4b 


IS   10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991  ) 


APPENDIX  D 


GUIDE  FOR  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  A  3  m  RADIATION  TEST  SITE  FOR 

MEASUREMENTS  ABOVE  100  MHz  OF  EQUIPMENT  EMITTING 

RADIO-FREQUENCY  ELECTROMAGNETIC  ENERGY 

Emission  measurements  can  be  made  for  all  radio-frequency  parameters  pertaining  to  radiated 
radio-frequency  electromagnetic  energy,  for  example,  transmitter  radiated  power,  transmitter 
radiated  spurious  power,  receiver  radiated  spurious  power. 


D 1 .    Test  site  characteristics 

Limits 

Useful  frequency  range:  100  MHz  to  1 000  MHz 

Nominal  site  attenuation:  12  dB  to  38  dB  for  100  MHz 

32  dB  to  58  dB  for  1000  MHz 

Note.  —  The  nominal  attenuation  of  the  test  site  for  a  half-wave  dipole  is  18  dB  for  100  MHz  and  38  dB  for 
1 000  MHz.  The  actual  attenuation  may  vary  due  to  ground  reflections. 

Limits 
Equipment  size:  6  m  maximum,  excluding  the  antenna 

Radiation  angle:  +40°  to  - 10° 

D2 .     Rad  i  ation  test  site 

The  3  m  test  site  described  in  this  standard  provides  consistent  results  regardless  of  time  or 
location.  It  permits  an  accuracy  over  the  useful  frequency  range  comparable  to  that 
achievable  on  larger  test  sites  while  requiring  less  sensitive  instrumentation  than  on  those 
larger  sites. 

The  radiation  test  site  shall  be  on  level  ground  having  uniform  electrical  characteristics  and 
be  free  from  reflecting  objects  over  as  wide  an  area  as  possible  to  ensure  that  extraneous 
electromagnetic  fields  do  not  affect  the  accuracy  of  the  test  results. 

A  continuous  ground  screen  (either  sheet  metal  or  wire  mesh  having  openings  of  no  greater 
than  1  cm,  in  order  to  maintain  good  electrical  contact  between  the  wires)  shall  be  used  to 
establish  a  uniformly  conducting  ground  over  part  of  the  test  site.  The  minimum  ground 
screen  area  is  shown  in  figure  Di,  page  55. 

No  extraneous  conducting  objects  having  any  dimensions  in  excess  of  5  cm  shall  be  present 
within  the  minimum  ground  screen  boundary.  Objects  between  the  minimum  ground  screen 
boundary  and  the  test  site  boundary  shall  not  be  such  as  to  affect  the  test  results. 

The  test  site  shall  have  a  turntable  and  a  measuring  antenna  mast.  The  distance  in  the 
horizontal  plane  between  the  vertical  axis  through  the  centre  of  the  turntable  and  the  vertical 
axis  through  the  centre  of  the  measuring  antenna  mounted  on  the  measuring  antenna  mast 
shall  be  3  m.  A  shelter  may  be  provided  for  all  or  part  of  the  test  site.  All  such  construction 
(except  for  nails,  hinges,  etc.,  having  no  dimension  greater  than  5  cm)  shail  be  of  wood, 
plastic,  or  other  non-conducting  material.  The  wood  should  be  impregnated  to  ensure 
minimum  water  absorption. 

All  test  equipment  if  located  above  ground  shall  preferably  be  powered  by  batteries.  If  the 
equipment  is  powered  from  the  mains,  each  of  the  mains  supply  cables  shall  be  provided  with 
a  suitable  radio-frequency  filter.  The  cable  connecting  the  filter  and  the  measuring  equipment 
shall  be  screened  and  shall  be  as  short  as  possible.  The  cable  connecting  the  filter  and  the 


47 


IS  10820  (Part  2)  :  1996 
IEC  489-2  (1991) 

supply  mains  shall  be  either  screened  and  be  at  ground  level,  or  shall  be  buried  to  a  depth  of 
approximately  30  cm. 


D3.     Position  of  the  equipment  under  test  (see  figure  D2,  page  56) 

The  equipment  in  its  cabinet  or  the  housing  in  which  it  normally  operates  shall  be  placed  on 
a  horizontal  platform,  the  upper  side  of  which  is  1.5  m  above  the  ground.  The  platform  and  its 
support  shall  be  made  of  non-conducting  materials. 

For  equipment  having  an  integral  antenna,  place  the  equipment  on  the  platform  in  a 
position  which  is  closest  to  its  position  in  normal  use. 

For  equipment  having  a  rigid  external  integral  antenna,  mount  the  equipment  so  that  the 
antenna  is  in  a  vertical  position. 

For  equipment  having  a  non-rigid  external  integral  antenna,  mount  the  antenna  vertically 
with  a  non-conducting  support. 

It  shall  be  possible  to  rotate  the  equipment  about  the  vertical  axis  through  the  centre  of  the 
antenna  of  the  equipment  under  test  It  is  recommended  that  a  platform  in  the  form  of  a 
turntable,  preferably  remotely  controlled,  should  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

If  the  equipment  has  a  power  cable,  it  should  extend  down  to  the  turntable,  and  any  excess 
cable  length  should  be  coiled  on  the  turntable. 


D4.    Measuring  antenna  support 

The  measuring  antenna  support  shall  consist  of  a  horizontal  boom  supported  by  a  vertical 
mast,  both  made  of  non-conducting  materials.  The  boom  shall  project  at  least  1  m  from  the 
vertical  mast  in  the  direction  of  the  equipment  under  test  and  shall  be  arranged  so  that  it  may 
be  raised  and  lowered  between  1  m  and  4  m. 


D5.     Measuring  antenna 

The  measuring  antenna  shall  be  suitable  for  the  reception  of  linearly  polarized  waves.  It 
may  consist  of  a  half-wave  dipole,  the  length  of  which  is  adjusted  for  the  frequency 
concerned.  For  practical  reasons,  however,  or  to  increase  the  sensitivity  of  the  measurements, 
it  may  be  preferable  to  use  a  number  of  separate  fixed  broadband  dipoles  or  more  complex 
antennas. 

The  measuring  antenna  shall  be  mounted  at  the  end  of  a  horizontal  boom.  The  mounting 
shall  permit  the  antenna  to  be  positioned  for  measuring  both  the  horizontal  and  the  vertical 
components  of  the  electrical  field.  The  lower  end  of  the  antenna  when  oriented  for  vertical 
polarization  and  placed  in  its  lowest  position  shall  be  at  least  0.3  m  above  the  ground. 

The  cable  from  the  antenna  shall  be  routed  along  the  horizontal  boom  for  at  least  3  m  and 
should  preferably  extend,  while  being  at  ground  level,  at  least  3  m  beyond  the  minimum 
boundary  of  the  test  site  before  it  is  connected  to  the  selective  measuring  device.  Alternatively, 
the  cable  may  be  routed  underground. 

D6.     Auxiliary  antenna 

The  auxiliary  antenna  replaces  the  equipment  under  test  during  part  of  the  measurement. 
The  auxiliary  antenna  shall  be  a  half-wave  dipole  and  shall  be  arranged  in  a  manner  similar  to 
that  of  the  measuring  antenna,  except  that  the  centre  of  the  auxiliary  antenna  should  coincide 
approximately  with  the  normal  position  of  the  centre  of  radiation  of  the  equipment  under  test. 


48 


IS10820(Part2):1996 
IEC  489-2  (1991) 

D7.     Radio-frequency  signal  generator 

A  well-shielded  radio-frequency  signal  generator,  with  a  matching  or  combining  network 
(if  required)  and  its  associated  output  cable,  shall  be  placed  in  a  position  such  that  it  will  not 
affect  the  accuracy  of  the  test  results,  and  shall  be  connected  and  matched  to  the  auxiliary 
antenna. 

D8.    Selective  measuring  device 

The  selective  measuring  device  may  be  a  frequency  selective  voltmeter,  a  spectrum  analyzer 
or  a  calibrated  field-strength  meter,  and  shall  be  placed,  together  with  its  associated  input 
cable,  in  a  position  such  that  it  shall  not  affect  the  accuracy  of  the  test  results. 


i 

3 

m  minimum                             / 

3  m  minimum 
\ 

3  m  minimum 
/ 

V 

3 

• 
m 

r 

^V  Measuring 
antenna 

Equipment  under  test 
or  auxiliary  antenna 

Minimum 
boundary 

ground  screen                / 

Top  view 


Y- 


Turntable 


7777777777- 


Variable  Mm 


///////////////y 


3m 


Side  view 


Fig.  DI.  —  3  m  site  dimensions  inside  the  ground  screen  boundary. 


49 


IS  10820  (Part  2):  1996 
ISO  489-2(1991) 


3m 


>  3  in 


Y 


.x^ 


Sh 


Variable  1-4  ni 


Variable 


W- 


cp 


Jt 


6 
I 1 

H      h 
i i 


v. 


i 1         r 1 

i i       i i 


Fig.  D2a.  —   Measuring  arrangement  for  the  equipment  under  test. 


* 


£  3  in 


1,5  m 


ST 


3m 


■=r> 


Y- 


>3m 


Vat  table  1-4  ip 


6 
I 1 

H  h 

I 1 


I           6                     2 
1 1  r 1 

H       r~H       I 
i 1       « i 

Fig.  D2b.  —  Measuring  arrangement  for  substitution  measurement. 


Legend 

1  -  equipment  under  test 

2  —  selective  measuring  device 

3  -  measuring  antenna 

4  «»  auxiliary  antenna 

5  —  radio-frequency  signal  generator 

6  -  optional       calibrated       attenuator       for 

measuring  the  effective  radiated  power,  or 
fundamental  oscillation  rejection  filter  for 
measuring  non-essential  emissions 


FIG.D2.  - 


Measuring    arrangement    foi    equipment   emitting    radio-frequency    electro- 
magnetic energy  (3  m). 


50 


(  Continued  from  second  cover  page ) 


(1991)  as  well  as  to  take  into  account  the  latest  technological  developments  in  this  field. 

The  text  of  the  IEC  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without  deviations 
Certain  conventions  are,  however,  not  indentical  to  those  used  in  Indian  Standards.  Attention  is  particualarly 
drawn  to  the  following: 

Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be  read 
as  'Indian  Standard'. 


CROSS  REFERENCES 

In  this  Indian  Standard,  the  following  International  Standards  are  referred  to.  Read  in  their  respective  places  the 
following: 


International  Standard 

IEC  244-1(1968) 

Methods         of     measurement         for< 
radiotransmitters :  Part  1  General  conditions 
of  measurement,  frequency,  output  power  and 
power  consumption 

IEC  489- 1(1983) 

Methods  of  measurement  for  radio  equipment 
used  in  the  mobile  services  :  Part  1  General 
definitions  and  conditions  of  measurement 


Corresponding  Indian  Standard 

IS  10853  ( Part  1 ) :  1984 

Methods  of  measurement  for  radio 

transmitters  :  Part  1  General  conditions  of 

measurement 

IS  10820  (Parti):  1984 

Methods  of  measurement  for  radio 

equipment  used  in  mobile  services  : 

Part  1  General  definitions  and  conditions  of 

measurement 


Degree  of 
Equivalence 

Technically 
equivalent 


Technically 
equivalent 


The  concerned  technical  committee  has  reviewed  the  provisions  of  following  standards  referred  in  this  adopted 
standard  and  has  decided  that  these  are  acceptable  for  use  in  conjunction  with  this  standard: 

(1)  IEC  244-6  (1976)  :  Methods  of  measurement  for  radio  transmitters:  Part  6  Cabinet  radiation  at 
frequencies  between  130  kHz  and  1  GHz. 

(2)  IEC  489-3  (1988)  :  Methods  of  measurement  for  radio  equipment  used  in  the  mobile  services  :  Part  3 
Receivers  for  A3E  or  F3E. 

(3)  CISPR  13  (1990)  :  Limits  and  methods  of  measurement  of  radio  interference  characteristics  of  sound 

and  television  broadcast  receivers  and  associated  equipment. 

Only  the  English  language  text  in  the  International  Standard  has  been  retained  while  adopting  it  in  this  Indian 
Standard. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act.  l986\o  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions' 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  LTD  20  (  1663  ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  94  02,  323  83  75  (  Common  to 

all  offices  ) 

Regional  Offices:  Telephone 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  f  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110002  1  323384! 


Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola  f    337  84  99,  337  85  6 1 

CALCUTTA  700054  [    337  86  26,  337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  [  60  38  43 

60  20  25 


Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001  13  [235  02  16,  235  04  42 

235  15  19.235  23  15 


Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andhen  (East)  I"  832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI  400093  \  832  78  91,832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR 

COIMBATORE.       FARIDABAD.       GHAZ1ABAD.       GUWAHAT1.         HYDERABAD 
JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  PATNA.      THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurta,  India 


