**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



^^^Eii^^^^^tt^i f mi^VNS ^g^^Ts^,^^! \V t >^?!i . =i : A ± \ltK^;X^^ 



IS 14680 (1999) : Landslide Control 
Hill Area Development Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



Guidelines [CED 56; 



i&^^f f /lA^sh^^JS^ rsJ^a^TTTF^ 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 
LANDSLIDE CONTROL — GUIDELINES 



1814680:1999 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



ICS 93.020 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1999 Price Group 7 



Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hill Area 
Development Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Landslides are being increasingly viewed as natural hazard. The concern regarding the lanslide problem is 
understood in the light of the fact that a majority of the landslides are triggered by natural causes including 
substantial rain falls, cloud bursts, earthquakes, etc and as such these are difficult to predict. 

However, the landslide problem has increased in magnitude due to man-made activities as well. Large scale 
construction works involving dams, hydroelectric projects, mining activities, housing projects, extensive expansion 
of road network, as well as deforestation resulting from the exploitation of the forests, have all taken their toll 
of the fragile eco-systems of hill ranges. At the same time, increasing needs for defence of the country, development 
of hilly areas, providing, uninterrupted communication systems to the isolated and far-flung areas, have all 
created a very high demand potential fot developing and keeping the road communication network in hills 
always open. This standard has been formulated with a view to understand the landslide phenomenon, their 
evaluation and control methods for effective correction measures. 

The composition of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
Annex A. 



IS 14680 : 1999 



Indian Standard 
LANDSLIDE CONTROL — GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers the guidelines for selection of 
various landslide control methods for effective 
correction measures to avoid landslides in hill areas. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

1498 : 1970 Classification and identification 

of soils for general engineering 
purposes (first revision ) 

1892 : 1979 Code of practice for subsurface 

investigation for foundation 
{first revision ) 

Retaining wall for hill area — 
1997 Guidelines : Part 2 Design of 
retaining/breast walls 



14458 

(Part2); 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1.1 Landslide 

Landslide denotes downward and outward movement 
of slope forming materials under the action of its own 
weight. 

3.1.2 Main Scarp 

A steep surface on the undisturbed ground around 
the periphery of the slide, caused by the movement 
of slide material away fi-om the undisturbed ground. 
The projection of the scarp surface under the displaced 
material becomes the surface of rupture. 

3.U Crown 

The material that is still in place, practically 
undisturbed and adjacent to the highest parts of the 
main scarp. 



3.1.4 Toe 

The margin of displaced material most distant from 
the main scarp. 

3.1.5 Flank 

The side of the landslide. 

3.1.6 Head 

The upper parts of the slide material along the contact 
between the displaced material and the main scarp. 

3.1.7 Foot 

That portion of the displaced material that lies 
downslope from the toe of the surface of rupture. 

3.1.8 Displaced Material 

The material that has moved away from its original 
position on the slope. 

3.1.9 Zone of Depletion 

The area within which the displaced material Ues below 
the original ground surface. 

3.1.10 Zone of Accumulation 

The area within which the displaced material lies above 
the original ground surface. 

3.1.11 Toe of Surface of Rupture 

The intersection ( sometimes buried ) between the 
lower part of the surface of rupture and the original 
ground surface. 

4 LANDSLIDE CLASSIFICATION 

The five principal types of mass movements such as 
falls, topples, slides, lateral spreads, flows and sixth 
as complex which is a combination of two or more 
principal types of movements and the recommended 
control measures are summarized in Table 1 . 

5 INVESTIGATIONS REQUIRED 

5.1 Subsoil profile and soil characteristics up to the 
depth of failure plane or up to dense/hard rock strata 
as per the requirement shall be collected. The 
information shall be obtained by conducting soil 
investigation as per IS 1892, 

5.2 Suitable number of static/dynamic cone penetration 
test shall be conducted up to the depth of failure plane/ 
hard rock strata as per the requirementi These shall 



IS 14680 : 1999 



Table 1 Landslide Classification System 

( Clause 4 ) 







Type of Material 




Type of Movement 


Soils 


Bed Rock 


Recommended Control 
Measures 




Predominantly 
fine 


Predominantly 
coarse 




Falls 


Earth fall 


Debris fall 


Rock fall 


Geotextile nailed on slope/spot 
bolting 


Topples 


Earth topple 


Debris topple 


Rock topple 


Breast walls/soil nailing 


Slides 


Rotational 


Earth slump 


Debris slump 


Rock slump 


Alteration of slope profde and 
earth and rock fill buttress 


Translational 


Earth block slide 


Debris block slide 


Rock block slide 


Reinforced earth or rock rein- 
forcement in rock slope 




Earth slide 


Debris slide 


Rock slide 


Biotechnical measured 


Lateral Spreads 


Earth spread 


Debris spread 


Rock spread 


Check dams along gully 


Flows 


Earth flow 


Debris flow 


Rock flow 


Series of check dams 




(Soil creep) 


(Deep creep) 


Rows of deep piles 


Complex 


Combination of two or more prin 
movement 


cipal types of 


Combined system 



form the basis for deciding the location and number 
of bore holes. 

5.3 Engineering properties of subsoil shall include 
index properties, shear parameters, compressibility 
characteristics, etc, as per IS 1498. 

5.4 Information shall be obtained with respect to 
nature of structure, if any, above the slide prone area, 
intensity and nature of loading and area covered by 
it. 

6 RECOMMENDED REMEDIAL MEASURES/ 
METHODS 

6. 1 Landslide preventive techniques are divided in 
two groups: 

a) Direct methods, and 

b) Indirect methods. Direct methods are further 
subdivided into: 

restraiiung structure, for exaiiqple; retaining 
walls, anchored walls, restraining piles etc; 

ii) easing of pressure by excavation; 

iii) reconstruction of slope using reinforced 
earth; and 

iv) rock reinforcement. 

Indirect methods involve erosion control measures, 
improvement in surface and sub-surface drainage. 



6.1.1 Restraining Structures 

Restraining structures are generally used to control 
slope stability problems (height <. 4 m). The properly 
designed and constructed rigid restraining structures 
are suitable where space is restricted. Retaining walls 
are erected to bring greater stability to dangerous slopes 
or to support existing landslides. The construction 
of retaining walls requires a great deal of manual and 
skilled work as well as expensive planking. 

6.1.1.1 Dry, banded and mortar masonry walls 

Retaining walls up to 3 m height are constructed in 
random rubble dry stone masonry. Retaining walls 
above 3 m height are built in lime/cement mortar 
masonry bands laid at a distance of 3 m centre to centre 
apart both in the horizontal and vertical directions 
with 0.6 m top width. Masonry courses shall be 
normal to face with the front batter of 1 (Horizontal) 
in 3 (Vertical) and the back vertical face may be left 
rough. The coping shall consist of large stone, laid 
or pointed in cement mortar. The top of coping shall 
be weather sloped. 

6*1.1.2 Gabions/sausage walls 

Apart from the masonry or concrete retaining walls, 
timber, metal or concrete cribwalls and gabions/ 
sausage walls are also used as restraining structures. 
Cribwall is formed in a wooden crib/mesh, in which 
dry stone masonry is built. Gabions/sausage walls 
are made by forming sausages of steel wire-netting 



IS 14680:1999 



of 4.00 mm diameter or geogrid having 100 mm 
square or hexagonal holes and filling the sausages 
with hard local boulders/stones and wrapping the 
wire net at the top. The process is carried out in-situ, 
where the sausage walls are to be installed on the slide. 
The gabions/sausage walls have the advantage of 
being able to withstand large deformations without 
cracking. Further, because of the open structure, they 
allow free drainage of water. Geogrids, which are 
made of polypropylene, have high resistance to impact 
and weathering besides possessing good strength 
and elongation characteristics. 

6.1.1,3 Concrete retaining walls 

The concrete gravity walls are very expensive and 
are advantageous for important structures and 
locations. Such walls require a foundation in bed 
rock or good soil below the slip surface and shall be 
safe from scour, frost and surface water. Proper 
drainage measures shall be provided to prevent 
water accumulating behind the wall. Both the design 



of the stem of the wall and the stability of the whole 
body of the wall are to be considered in the design. 
The body of the wall is taken to include the mass of 
soil directly above the heel of the cantilievered wall 
and earth pressure. The formula for the safety factor 
may be used to estimate resistance required to lateral 
thrust. The standard practice is to include weep holes 
in designing the wall. The design consideration of 
retaining walls shall be as per IS 14458 ( Part 2 ). 

6.1.1.4 Restraining structures using empty bitumen 
drum 

Temporary low cost restraining structures up to a 
maximum height of 3 m are constructed as a short term 
measure using empty bitumen drums, landslide 
debris and nominal reinforcing materials. The top and 
bottom covers of the bitumen drum are removed and 
the cylindrical shell is utilized. These are arranged in 
two rows one behind the other. The drums are 
interconnected both vertically and horizontally by mild 
steel plates, rods and bolts ( see Fig. 1 ). The drum 



25 MS BARS 




^ y-50x6 MSFUT 
•| / e 2m c/c 



WASTE SLOPE 
FILLING 



50x6 
MS FLAT 



DRUM > 25 mm MS ROD GROUTED INTO BASE 



25mm MS BAR 
3-0 m LONG 



BACK CUTTING J 

PLAN 
Fig. 1 Anchored Drum Diaphragm Wall Built of Slope Waste and Empty Bitumen Drum 



IS 14680 : 1999 



wall is suitably anchored at the base and also to the 
back fill for preventing sliding and tilting. These drums 
are then filled with debris and boulders to give weight 
and stability. 

6.1.1.5 Anchored wails 

a) Free-standing gravity walls have an upper 
limit of about 10 m and slides of only modest 
proportions may be prevented or stabilized 
using this type of structures. Stabilization of 
a slope where the failure surface is deep or 
where the forces are larger than whiich may 
be carried by a gravity wall may be effected 
by the installation of anchors up to a stable 
zone. 

b) Stabilization by deep, prestressed anchors is 
generally applied to soil slopes. Walls with 
prestressed anchors, have a major advantage 
by actively opposing the movement of the soil 
mass, rather than having passively as 
unstressed anchors and gravity structures. 
These are employed either in conjimction with 
retaining structures or alone to reduce the 
driving forces of a landslide and to increase 
the normal effective stresses on its slip surface. 
Improvements in slope stability against even 
small movements/settlement may be achieved 
by using ground anchors, restraining piles or 
similar techniques. 

c) Tie-back wall design uses the basic principle 
of carrying the backfill forces on the wall by 
a 'tie' system to transfer the imposed load to 
an area behind the slide mass where 
satisfactory resistance can be estabhshed. The 
ties may consist of pre or post tensioned 
cables, rods, wires or some form of anchor back 
to develop adequate passive earth pressure. 
Current practice in the design of tied-back wall 
to stabilize a slope is based on either a 
consideration of factor of safety alone or a 
combination of deformation and limit 
equilibrium considerations. 

6.1.1.6 Restraining piles 

Restraining piles are used where, due to the limitation 
of space, it is not possible to flatten the slopes or 
use other gravity type structures to improve the slope 
stability Piles are installed in the sliding soil mass 
and bed rock through boreholes in the sliding mass 
to stablize a landslide through resistance and are used 
to prevent small scale landslides. These piles shall 
consist of steel or reinforced concrete piles. The pile 
is defined as a bending pile since its length is long 
compared to its diameter. 



6.1.2 Excavation Methods 

Excavation methods contribute to increased stability 
of the soil mass beneath a slope. The main methods 
used for landslide control are removal of unstable 
materials, flattening of slopes, benching of slopes, 
change of Une or grade and alteration of slope geometry 
(seeFig.l). 

6.1.2.1 Removal of unstable materials 

Complete or partial removal of the unstable material 
is considered among other alternative design methods. 
The removal of potentially unstable material shall 
vary from simple stripping of a surface layer by a few 
meters to depths as great as 50 m. For shallow soil 
profiles, consideration shall be given to a permanent 
solution involving the entire rem&val of the slide. For 
deep soil profiles, the removal of material at the top 
of the slide increase stability as it reduces the 
activating forces. This method is suitable for rotational 
slides. 

6.1.2.2 Flattening of slopes 

This method consist primarily of proper slope design 
followed by proper surface drainage measures. These 
are best suited to slides moving downslope towards 
a road and not for slides that undermine a road on its 
downward slope. A uniform slope is adopted from 
ditch line to the top of the slope. The surface of failure 
and method of analysis defend upon whether the 
slope is infinite or a finite one. Most talus soil are 
likely to be stable on 2 : 1 slopes for a cut up to 6 m in 
height but may require 3 : 1 slopes for cuts greater 
than 9 m in height, 

6.1.2.3 Benching of slopes 

This method involves straight slopes separated by 
near horizontal bench. Benching increases stability 
of slopes by dividing the long slope into segments 
or smaller slopes connected by benches, the proper 
width of bench shall be estimated by analysis of 
stability of slopes for a given soil. The width of bench 
shall not be less than 8 m to enable the slope 
segments to act independently. In this method, 
construction becomes easier since steeper slopes are 
feasible with benches. The slope angle between the 
benches can be either uniform or variable. The 
benches shall be constructed with a V-shaped or 
gutter section with a longitudinal drainage grade and 
with suitable catch basins to carry the water down 
the slopes. The ditch shall be lined or paved to reduce 
erosion or to prevent percolation of water into 
pervious areas on the benches. 

6.1.2.4 Change of line or grade 

In the early design stage, generally cut and fill slopes 



IS 14680 : 1999 



EXCAVATE 




REDUCES 
FORCE 
(q) REMOVAL OF HEAD 



EXCAVATE 



REMOVES 
FORCE 




BEDROCK 



(b) COMPLETE REMOVAL 



TENSION CRACK7 
EXCAVATE- 




REOUCES 
FORCE 



BEDROCK 
(c) UNIFORM REMOVAL 



MOVES ON TO 
SERM 



EXCAVATE 




REDUCES 
RESISTANCE 



(d) PARTIAL AT TOE 



EXCAVATE 




EXCAVATE- 


\^\ 




^^ 


^i 


REDUCES 
FORCE 



REDUCES 
FORCE 



(e) SLOPE FLATTENING (f) BENCHING SLOPE 

Fig. 2 Excavation Techniques 



are evaluated for potential stability. However, 
adjustment to the line and grade are effected to 
minimize or completely eliminate the slope stability 
problem. Line or grade changes are generally done 
to reduce the driving forces. 

6,1,2.5 Alteration of slope geometry 

Altering the geometry of a slope is also one of the 
most efficient method to improve the stability of deep 
seated slides. One of the simple method is to remove 
all the unstable material and if necessary replace it 
with stronger material. The other common approach 
is to either remove some of the material near the top 
ofthe unstable zone or to add material at the toe. Once 
the toe has been loaded, the factor of safety increases 
with time due to dissipation of the undrained pore 
pressures. 

6.1.3 Reconstruction of Slope Using Reinforced Earth 

6.1.3.1 Reinforced earth using metallic stripes 

A reinforced earth retaining wall has three ingre- 
dients, such as, the selected granular backfill material, 
the reinforcing elements usually strips and the precast 
concrete panels of the facing called skin nanels. 
Reinforced earth wall acts as a gravity structure placed 



on a stable foimdation and shall be designed to resist 
overturning, internal shear and sliding at or below the 
base. 

NOTES 

1 Reinforced earth wall is economical where height is 
more than 5.0 m. 

2 Reinforced earth walls in seismic region shall be used 
with caution as the friction between reinforcement and 
soil may be reduced during earthquake. 

6.1.3.2 Geofabric reinforcement structure on slopes 

Geofabric and geogrids are used in a similar manner 
like steel strips in the reinforced earth method. 
Stress-strain-time characteristics ofthe soil and the 
geofabric shall be studied carefully before adopting 
parameters for analysis and design of reinforced earth 
structure. The allowable tensile force corresponding 
to the maximum allowable strain ofthe reinforcement 
shall be adopted. Care shall be taken in the design of 
settlement sensitive structures near the crest of 
geosynthetic reinforced slopes. 

6.1.3.3 Slope reinforcement by soil nailing 

This technique consists of improving the soil slopes 
sometimes near vertical cuts by the inclusion of 



18 14680:1999 



elements which are resistant to tensile, compressive, 
shear and/or bending forces. Steel rods/bars or angled 
sections are installed into the predrilled holes of soil 
slopes to produce composite action in combination 
with a shotcrete face panel. Soil nailing offers a neat 
and economic solution to the problem of providing 
support to slopes/excavation, in particular for very 
compact granular soils. 

6.1.3.4 Micro-piles, rootpiies for slope stabilization 

Stability of hill slopes is increased by installing a net- 
work of small piles. The piles may be wooden piles 
or sand/cement grout with a single 25 to 30 mm diameter 
reinforcing bars cast in-situ . A number of these piles 
installed in different directions are connected with a 
section varying from 0.4 m>< 1.0 m to 0.75 m x 2.0 m 
reinforced concrete capping beams running along 
the contours. The actual diameter of micro-piles may 
vary from 100 to 125 mm and the length may be up to 
15 m or so. 

6.1.4 Rock Reinforcement 

Rockslides and rockfalls can be stabilized by rock 
reinforcement. 

6.1.5 Erosion Control Measures 

6.1.5.1 Plantation of grasses and shrubs to restore 
the vegetative cover on denuded slope help in 
arresting the surface erosion. Some of the techniques 
of establishing a vegetative cover on hill slopes 
are: 

a) Asphalt mulch treatment 

For this treatment, the proposed slope area is 
prepared into vast seed beds by sounding off 
the tops, regrading or reshaping and finally 
raking the top soil about 20 mm thick. Seeds 
and the root slips of locally available grasses 
are dibbled 150 to 200 mm apart, root to root 
and row to row. An asphalt emulsion (mulch) 
of a suitable grade is then spread by a sprayer. 
The optimum rate of application of the emulsion 
is 0. 9 litre/m^ which is about 1 . mm thick film. 
The asphaltic film gradually disintegrates and 
its place is taken by a carpet of green vegeta- 
tion. 

b) Slope treatment by Jute/coir netting 

The slopes are initially demarcated, graded and 
uniformally levelled. Seeding at the rate of 
5 kg per acre or dibbling of the root slips of 
locally available grasses 150 mm apart row to 
row and plant to plant is done. The rolls of 
the cpir/jute netting are then spread out on the 
slope prepared as above. The eilgeii ^f the 
netting are firmly anchored in the grouna using 



150 mm iron nails. Due to the 'check dam' 
action, erosion of soil is prevented during rains 
and the danger of seeds and nutrients being 
washed away along with top soil is stopped. 
Thus, vegetation takes roots quickly and grows 
to cover the entire slope. 

c) Bally benching 

This technique is used for control of surface 
erosion on slide areas and in preventing the 
deepening of gullies/chutes, caused by the 
eroding action of flowing water. Wooden bailies 
(posts) of 120 to 150 mm dia and 2.0 to 2.7 m 
long are vertically driven in rows into the slope. 
The spacing of bailies range from 0.60 to 
1.20 m centre to centre. The bailies are 
embedded into the slope by about 1.0 to 
1.50 m and protrude out by about 1.0 to 
1 .20 m. The vertical posts are tied with three 
tiers of horizontal runners about 80 to 100 mm 
dia from uphill side with the help of 6 mm dia 
and about 200 to 250 mm long nails or braced 
with galvanised wires of about 4.00 mm 
diameter Finallytheuphill side of gullies/chutes 
is backfilled with boulders to avoid erosion. 

6.1.6 Surface Drainage 

6. 1.6. 1 Control of surface water consists of two main 
parts: 

a) the collection of run-off at the uphill boundary 
of any unstable area, 

b) maximising run-off from the unstable area and 
controlling and collecting the run-off. 

Catch water or interceptor drains, side drains and 
cross-drains constitute some of the important types 
of drains used in a system of isurface drainage. 

a) Catch water or interceptor drains 

In order to intercept and divert the water from 
the hill slope, catch water drains shall be located 
very carefully, after the topography of the 
ground is studied in detail. Catch water drains 
shall be lined and properly maintained and shall 
be given a gradient of 1 in 50 to 1 in 33 to avoid 
high water velocity and possible wash out. A 
number of inter-connecting lined catch water 
drains may need to be reconstructed on the 
slope to collect the surface run-off if the area 
of slide is large. Water from the catch water 
drains shall be diverted into a chute or a natu- 
ral hill-side drain or diverted by sloping drains 
and lead into culverts at a lower level finally 
to be lead through chutes into the nearest natural 
watercourse. 



IS 14680 : 1999 



b) Road side drains 

i) Road side drains are provided on the road 
side at the foot of the hill slope to drain out 
water from the road surface and the water 
from the portion of the hill slope below the 
catch water drains. Road side drains are 
constructed of dry rubble stone masonry 
with semi-circular saucer, rectangular, 
trapezoidal, angle drain and kerb and 
x:hannel drain in sections. Angle or keib and 
channel drains ( see Fig. 3 ) are suitable where 
road width available is restricted and in 
emergencies, it serves as an extra width and 
not easily damaged. 

ii) The slope of the bed shall be 1 :20 to 1 :25 to 
allow water to flow at self-cleaning velocity. 
If the grades are rather steep, the side drains 
shall be stepped to break the velocity of 



water or provided with small dry rubble stone 
masonry check walls to provide falls to 
minimize bed scour. A shoulder of 0.3 m 
width may be provided between the edge 
of the drain and the hill slope. Generally, 
lined side xlrains shall be constructed. 
However, unlined side drains are sometimes 
provided on hard/stiffer strata. 

c) Cross drains 

Cross drainage shall be provided at intervals 
of 4 to 6 per km depending upon the nature of 
the terrain, to prevent the road side drains 
from being overloaded and flooding the road 
surface. These shall be provided at every point 
of natural nallah and water crossing. The cross 
drainage structures, are culverts, scuppers, 
causeways and minor or major bridges. 



THICKLY VEGETATED 
STABLE SLOPE IN 
HUMID AREAS 




STONE PITCHING OR 
CEMENT CONCRETE 



(a) Angle Drain 




-15cm CUT STONE PITCHING 
OR CONCRETE SLAB 

(b) Kerb and Channel Drain 

Fig. 3 Angle and Kerb and Channel Drain 
7 



IS 14680 : 1999 



i) Culverts 

A catch pit is provided at the mouth of the 
culvert towards the hill slope ( see Fig. 4 ). 
The minimum size of the vent of the culvert 
is kept generally 0,9m wide and 1 . 5 m in 
height, so as to clean them before and after 
the rainy season. Adequate protective works 
are required at the discharge point towards 
valley side, which shall preferably be in the 
form of stepped toe walls to dissipate the 
kinetic energy of the discharged water 
outfall. Different types of culverts are 
described below: 

Arch culvert 

An arch culvert consists of abutments, wing 
walls, arch, parapets and the foundations. 
The construction materials commonly used 
are stone masonry or concrete. Floor and 
curtain wall shall be provided to avoid the 
erosion of the foundation soil, thereby 
preventing the damage to the culvert. 

Slab culvert 

A slab culvert consists of RCC slab with 
or without beams or a stone slab or steel 
girders to cover the span across the abut- 
ments and piers. The deck slab shall be 
designed as one way slab. 

Pipe culvert 

Pipe culverts are provided when discharge 
of stream is smaller or sufficient height of 
bank is not available. Usually one or more 
RCC pipes of 0.50 m or 0.90 m diameter are 
placed side by side. Exact number and 
diameter of pipes depends upon the 



discharge and height of bank. Splayed type 
wing walls are provided for easy approach 
of water. Concrete bedding shall also be 
given below the pipes and earth cushion 
of sufKcient thickness on the top to protect 
the pipe. The gradient of the pipes shall 
not be flatter than 1 in 30. 

ii) Scupper 

It is an economical type of culvert or cross 
drain where masonry retaining wall is 
provided for the road. The water collected 
through side drains or nallah, is discharged 
to the valley side through a small cross 
drainage structure 0.9 to 1 .0 m wide made 
of random rubble dry masonry abutments. 
The top of the abutments are corbelled with 
a few layers of stones and a stone slab is 
laid on the top. Retaining walls are provided 
on both ends of scupper. 

iii) Causeways 

At places where the crossing streams carry 
debris or the channel are not defined and 
the spread of water is large with shallow 
depth and the velocity is within reasonable 
limits, then solid or vented masonry 
causeways are provided. A causeway 
allows flood to pass over it. There are two 
types of causeways: 

a) Low level causeway, and 

b) High level causeway. 

Low level causeways 

Banks of small rivers or streams which 
remain dry for most part of the year, are 



GUIDE WALL- 



mum 



FULL FMN WIDTH 



GUIDE WALL 



APRON-, -VniS/A CHUTE 




\ J^ 



"W 



PlTCH^^4G 






1 




CATCH PIT 



Fig. 4 Culvert with Catchpit, Chute Guide Wall and Apron 

8 



IS 14680 : 1999 



cut down at an easy slope. Stream or river 
having sandy beds, are generally provided 
with the stone paving on substantial bed 
of concrete with upstream and downstream 
out off walls to prevent possible scour 
( see Fig. 5 ). 

High level causeways 

High level causeway is submersible road 
bridge designed to be overtopped in flood 
( see Fig, 6 ). This involves heavy earth 
work in cuttings for bridge approaches. Its 
formation level is fixed in such a way as not 
to cause interruption to traffic during flood 
for more than 12 hours at a time and not 
for more than six times in a year. 

6.1.7 Sub-Surface Drainage 

6.1.7.1 Sub-surface drainage is usually more effective 
for deep seated landslides because it leads to a decrease 
in pore water pressure directly at the failure plane and 
tends to produce a more stable condition of slide area. 
Sub-surface drainage methods are the installation of 



horizontal drains, vertical drainage wells, deep trench 
drains and drainage tunnels. 

a) Horizontal drains 

1) Horizontal drains are made up of 50 mm 
diameter perforated/slotted rigid PVC 
pipes. Generally, the upper two^third 
portion of the pipe section is perforated/ 
slotted ( see Fig. 7 ). The pipes are installed 
in a pre-drilled boreholes at a negative 
gradient of 5 to 15 degrees to the horizontal 
into a hill or an embankment for removing 
ground water of the sub-soil with poor 
permeability. Light weight drilling rig 
mounted on crawler tractor, capable of drilling 
boreholes at angles 30 degree up and 30 
degree down fi-om the horizontal is required. 
To avoid the risk of PVC pipes sliding out 
or being withdrawn, a check valve is fitted 
permanently on the first length of the PVC 
pipe before introducing into the pre-drilled 
hole. 



ROAD 



TOE 
WALL 




SECTION AT A A 



ROAD 



Fig. 5 Plain or Low Level Causeway 



ROAD SURFACE 




EEP HOLE 
STAGGERED 



/WALL 



1:4.$ 



SECTIONAL ELEVATION 

Fig. 6 Vented or High Level Cauesway 
9 



IS 14680 : 1999 



CEMENT MORTAR 
PLUG 




SLOTTED 
PVC PIPE 



BED ROCK 




SECTION A A (ENLARGED) 

Fig. 7 Horizonttal Drain Construction 



ii) It is also recommended to shroud the pipe 
by a suitable geotextile so that the soil 
particles are prevented from entering into 
the perforations/slots thereby reducing the 
possibility of its clogging. 

b) Deep trench drains 

Deep trench drains are used where water can 
be intercepted at depths less than 5 to 8 m. 
Filter-fabric covered trench drains consist of 
a permeable gravel core, surrounded by a filter 
fabric to prevent clogging ( see Fig. 8 ). The 
gravel size is either 16-32 mm or 35-70 mm to 
ensure a sufficiently high void ratio. After 
the trench has been excavated, the filter fabric/ 



geotextiles is spread out into the channel and 
then backfilled with clean gravel upto the top 
water-bearing layer. The geotextile is then 
overlapped before the top layer can be 
backfilled by local soils, 

7 EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 

The equipment and accessories shall depend upon 
the method of landslide remedial measures adopted. 
In practice, the type of equipment employed can vary 
considerably depending upon the design and resources 
required and depends upon slide to slide. However, 
it is important that the equipments shall be capable 
of reaching the difficult terrain, steeper slopes and 
heights. 



10 



IS 14680 : 1999 




BACKFILL 



OVERLAPPING 
OF 6E0TEXTILE 



GEOTEXTILE 



GRAVEL AND 
BOULDER 



BACKFILL 




OVERLAPPING 
OF GEOTEXTILE 



GEOTEXTILE 



GRAVEL AND 
BOULDER 



(o) CROSS SECTION (COLLECTOR) 



(b) CROSS SECTION (FEEDER) 



Fig. 8 Cross Section of Trench Drains 



11 



IS 14680 : 1999 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 

COMMnTEECOMPOSrnON 

Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 



Chairman 
Dr Gopal Ranjan 

Members 

Sffiu Sheikh Nazir Ahmed 

Prof A. K. Chakraborty 

Shri R. C. Lakhera {Alternate) 

Chairman- cuM-M AN AGING Director 
Shri B. B. Kumar {Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Dam Design) 

Superintending Engineer (Tehri Dam 
Design Circle) {Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Roads) 

Superintending Engineer (Roads) {Alternate) 

Deputy Director General (D&S Directorate, DGBR) 
Deputy Secretary (T), IRC {Alternate) 

Director, HCD (N&W) 

Director (Sardar Sarovar) {Alternate) 

Dr R. K. Dubey 

Dr D. S. Upadhyay {Alternate) 

ShriPawan Kumar Gupta 

Field Coordinator {Alternate) 

Shri T N. Gupta 

Shri J. Sengupta {Alternate) 

Shri M. M. Harbola 

Shri P. K. Pathak {Alternate) 

Dr U. C. Kalita 

Shri B. C. Borthakur {Alternate) 

Shri S. Kaul 

Shri Kireet Kumar 

Prof A. K. Maitra 

Prof Arvind Krishan {Alternate) 

Dr G, S. Mehrotra 

Shri N. C, Bhagat {Alternate) 

Shri P. L. Narula 

Shri S. Dasgupta {Alternate) 

Smt M. Parthasarathy 

Shri N. K. Bali {Alternate) 

Shri D. P. Pradhan 

Shri P. Jagannatha Rao 

Shri D. S. Toua {Alternate) 

Dr K. S. Rao 

Dr Bhawani Singh 

Dr P C. Jain {Alternate) 

Shri Bhoop Singh 

Shri Raman Singh 

Shri J. Gopalakrishna {Alternate) 



Representing 
University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Public Works Department, Jammu & Kashmir 
Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehra Dun 

National Buildings Construction Corporation, New Delhi 

Uttar Pradesh Irrigation Design Organization, Roorkee 

Ministry of Surface Transport, New Delhi 
Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Society for Integrated Development of Himalayas, Mussorie 

Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Forest Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Regional Research Laboratory, Jorhat 

Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 

G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development, 
Almora 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 

Sikkim Hill Area Development Board, Gangtok 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

IIT, New Delhi 

University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi 
Directorate General Border Roads (D&S), New Delhi 

( Continued on page 13 ) 



12 



( Continued from page 12 ) 

Mefrd>ers 

Shri R. D. Singh 

Dr Sudhir Kumar (Alternate) 

Prof C. P. Sinha 

Shri D. K. Singh (Alternate) 

Shri Lakhbir Singh Sonkhla 

Shri A. K, Soni 

Dr p. Srinivasulu 

Shri N. Gopalakrishnan {Alternate) 

SuPTDG Surveyor of Works (NZ) 

Surveyor of Works - 1 (NZ) (Alternate) 

Shri V. Suresh 

Shri D. P. Singh (Alternate) 

Shri S. C. Tiwari 

Shri K. Venkatachalam 

Shri S. K. Babbar (Alternate) 

Dr N. S. Virdhi 

Shri ViNOD Kumar, 
Director (Civ Engg) 



IS 14680 : 1999 



Representing 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 

North-Eastern Regional Institute of Water and Land Management, 
Assam 

Public Works Department, Shimla 

Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Housing & Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO), New Delhi 

U. P. Hill Area Development Board, Lucknow 
Central Soil & Material Research Station, New Delhi 

Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehra Dun 
Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Member-Secretary 

Shri T. B. Narayanan 

Joint Director (Civ Engg), BIS 



13 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its pub libations. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions' 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 56 ( 5581 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 3233841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 I 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34.A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 45 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 I 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



