**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11869 (1987) : Hand and/or Foot Contamination Monitors 
and Warning Assemblies [LITD 8: Electronic Measuring 
Instruments, Systems and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11869 - 1987 

UPC 53912'074 _^ lEC Pub 504 ( 1975 ) 



( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR HAND AND/OR FOOT CONTAMINATION 
MONITORS AND WARNING ASSEMBLIES 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with lEC Pub 504 ( 1975 ) 'Hand and/or foot contamina- 
tion monitors and warning assemblies' issued by the International Eleetrotechnical Commission ( lEC ) 
was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Nuclear Instrumentation 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics, and Telecommunication Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they shall be read 
as 'Indian Standard'. 

Only the English language text of the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in 
this Indian Standard. 



Adopted 28 January 1987 



© September 1987, BIS 



Gr7 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



18:11869-1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 



CONTENTS 

Page 



Clause 

1 . Scope and object 3 

2. Terminology . 3 

3. Classification of assemblies 4 

4. Display 5 

5. General test procedures 5 

6. Radiation characteristics 6 

7. Response to other ionising radiations ^ 10 

8. Operating characteristics 11 

9. Mechanical characteristics 13 

10. Power supply 13 

11. Storage 14 

12. Certificate 14 



( lEC page 3 ) 



IS : 11869 - 19»7 
/lEC Pub 504 (1975) 



1. Scope and object 

1.1 The present publication applies to contamination monitors and warning assemblies specifically provided 
for hands and/or feet, irrespective of whether or not the hands or feet are bare. 

These assemblies comprise at least: 

— a detector sub-assembly; 

— a measuring sub-assembly. 

1.2 The pubUcation is appUcable to: 

— alpha hand and/or foot contamination monitors; 

— alpha hand and/or foot contamination warning assemblies; 

— beta hand and/or foot contamination monitors; 

— beta hand and/or foot contamination warning assemblies, 
as defined in Clause 2. 

1.3 If an assembly has been designed to carry out combined functions, it shall comply with tne requirements 
pertaining to these different functions. If, on the other hand, it has been designed to perform one function, and in 
addition, is also capable of carrying out other functions, then it shall comply with the requirements for the first 
function, and it would be desirable for it to meet the requirements pertaining to the others. 

1 .4 The requirements given below correspond to assemblies currently being manufactured. It is, however, possible 
to use assemblies which do not meet the numerical requirements set out below when such requirements are not 
considered essential for a given purpose. 

In such cases, the performance of the assemblies shall be specified by agreement between me manufacturer and 
the user, but the determination of the characteristics of the assemblies shall conform to the methods given in the 
present publication. 

1.5 The pubfication is not applicable to the operating characteristics of indicating or recording instruments 
as such (e.g. indicating meters, recorders, alarms, etc.). 

The ciiaracteristics of such instruments shall be in conformity with the general specifications appropriate to 
them. 

1.6 This publication specifies for the above-described assemblies: general test procedures, radiation character- 
istics, operating and mechanical characteristics, and also the identification certificate. 



2. Tormiiiology 

2.1 Degrees of requirements 
In the present publication, the following terminology is employed: 

— the word "shall" signifies a mandatory requirement; 

— the word "should" signifies strongly recommended; 

— the word "may" signifies an acceptable method, or example of good practice. 



( lEC page 7 ) 



IS : 11869 . 1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 

2.2 Definitions ' 

For the purpose of this pubHcation, the following definitions of measuring assembUes shall apply. 

2.2.1 Hand and j or foot contamination meter 

A radiation meter designed to measure hand and/or foot contamination and including one or several radiation 
detectors and associated sub-assemblies or basic functional units. 

2.2.2 Hand and I or foot contamination warning assemblies 

An assembly intended to give a warning (usually visual or audible) that the degree of contamination of the surface 
of the hand and/or foot exceeds some predetermined value or that the measured value is not within some predeter- 
mined limits. 

2-2.3 Hand and I or foot contamination monitor 

An assembly having the functions of both hand and/or foot contamination meter and a hand/or foot contami- 
nation warning assembly. 

2.2.4 Response 

The quotient of the output variable of the measuring assembly or sub-assembly by the value of the measured 
quantity, 

2.2.5 Thin radioactive source 

For the purpose of this publication, the following definition shall apply for ^ thin radioactive source: a 
radioactive source of which the thickness of the radioactive deposit is sufficiently small to ensure that absorption 
within the material of the source of the radiation of interest, emitted by the radioactive deposit, is negligible. 

2.2.6 Coefficient of variation 

Ratio of the standard deviation a to the value of the arithmetic mean jc of a set of « measurements Xi given by the 
following formula: 



X X ^ n — \ 



2.2.7 Conventionally true contamination level 
The best approximate value of the true surface contamination. 

2.3 Test nomenclature 
23 A Qualification tests 

Set of tests performed in order to verify that the requirements of a specification are fulfilled. 
Note. — Qualification tests are subdivided into type tests and routine tests, as defined below. 

2.3.1.1 Type tests 

Those qualification tests which are performed on one assembly or on a small number of assemblies, considered 
to be representative of an industrial production, and which, in principle, are not repeated on each assembly. 

2.3.1.2 Routine tests 

Those qualification tests which are performed on each production assembly. 

2.3,2 Acceptance tests 

Contractual tests performed in the presence of a customer or his representative in order to verify the quality 
of a delivery. These tests are, in general, selected from the qualification tests, although the methods of performing 
them may be diflferent. 

3. Classificatioii (rf assemblies 

The assemblies are classified: 

3.1 According to the type of radiation as: 

— alpha contamination monitors (or warning assemblies), 

— beta contamination monitors (or warning assemblies), 

— alpha-beta contamination monitors (or warning assemblies). 

(IECpa»e9) 4 



IS : 11869 - 19»7 

lECPab 504 (1975) 

3.2 According to their function as: 

— contamination monitors, 

— contamination warning assemblies. 

3.3 According to the type of surface as: 

— assemblies designed to. monitor contamination of hands, 

— assemblies designed to monitor contamination of feet, 

— assemblies designed to monitor contamination of both feet and hands. 

3.4 According to their power supplies as: 

— assemblies powered by the mains, 

— assemblies powered by primary or secondary batteries (emergency supply). 

3.5 According to their type as: 

— assemblies without background compensation, 

— assemblies with background compensation. 



4. Display 

The display of the assembly shall be related to the counting rate or to the number of counts in a predetermined 
time. 

The scale shall be graduated either in these units or as a percentage of a predetermined maximum level. Whatever 
the graduation of the scale, the manufacturer shall also state the relationship between this graduation and the 
contamination level in |xCi for a given energy or radionuclide. 

In countries in which requirements specify a maximum permissible level, this may be taken as the predetermined 
maximum level. 



5. General test procedures 

5.1 Nature of tests 

With the exception of the routine test described in Sub-clause 6.5.2, all the tests enumerated in the following 
sections are to be considered as type tests (Sub-clause 2.3.1.1). 

Nevertheless, some of these tests may, by agreement between manufacturer and purchaser, be considered accept- 
ance tests. 

5.2 Basic principles 

Reference conditions are given by the second column of Table T unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer. 

Except where otherwise specified, the tests in this standard shall be carried out under standard test conditions 
given in the third column of Table I. 

5.3 Reference radioactive source dimensions 

The cahbration reference sources* for all tests shall have areas equivalent to the hand or foot. 

Unless otherwise specified in the method, the dimensions of the reference sources shall be: 
15 cm X 10 cm for hand monitors and warning assemblies, 
30 cm X 10 cm for foot monitors and warning assemblies. 

The activity distribution of such reference sources shall be as uniform as possible. 



♦ The activities of the reference sources are specified in Sub-ciauses 6.1.2.1 and 6.1.2.2. 

5 (lEC page 11) 



IS : 1180 - 1987 
I£CPDb504ri975) 

5.4 Statistical fluctuations 

> For any test involving the use of radiation, if the magnitude of the statistical fluctuations of the indication arising 
from the random nature of radiation alone is a significant fraction of the variation of the indication permitted 
in the test, then a sufficient number of readings shall be taken to ensure that the mean value of such readings may 
be estimated with sufficient accuracy to demonstrate compliance with the test in question. 

The interval between such readings shall be sufficient to ensure that the readings are statistically independent. 



Table I 
Reference conditions and test conditions 



Influence 


Reference conditions 

(unless otherwise indicated 

by the manufacturer) 


Standard test conditions * 

(unless otherwise indicated by the 

manufacturer) 


Warm-up time 


> 15 min 


^ 15 min 


Ambient temperature 


20 X 


18 °C to 22 °C 


Relative humidity 


65% 


55% to 75% 


Atmospheric pressure 


101.3 kPa 


86 kPa to 106 kPa 


Power supply voltage 


Nominal power supply voltage U^^ 


Nominal power supply voltage U-^ ± 1% 


Power supply frequency 


Nominal frequency 


Nominal frequency ± 2% 


Power supply waveform 


Sinusoidal 


Sinusoidal with total harmonic distortion 
lower than 5% 


External gamma radiation at the 
level of the detector 


Less than 20 ^R/h 


Less than 25 nR/h 


Electromagnetic field of external 
origin 


Negligible 


Less than the lowest value that causes 
interference 


Magnetic induction of external 
origin 


Negligible 


Less than twice the induction due to the 
Earth's magnetic field at the place of test 


Setting of the assembly control 


Set up for normal operation 


Set up for normal operation 


Contamination by radioactive 
elements 


Negligible 


Less than the lowest value that can be 
detected by the assembly 



The standard test conditions represent the permitted tolerances on the reference conditions. See lEC Publication 359. 



6. Radiation characteristics 

6.1 Surface contamination response 
6.1.1 Mode of expression 

The surface contamination response of the assembly for the reference source shall be given in scale units per 
surface activity. 

Scale units, as selected according to Clause 4, are: 

1) counts [«] per second, or 

2) counts [n\ in a predetermined time, or 

3) a predetermined maximum permissible level (MPL). 



( lEC page 13 ) 



6 



Hence, the surface contamination response is expressed as follows; 

«-s"^ 

-T^T' 9 (name of radionuclide) 

fiCi-cm"^ 

2) —p^^ 5 (name of radionuclide) 

^iCi-cm"^ ^ 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 



3) MPL 



(name of radionuclide) 



6.1.2 Method of measuring the surface contamination response 

6.1.2.1 Alpha monitors and warning assemblies 

A thin uncoUimated alpha emitting radioactive source such as 239py ^j. 24i^jj^^ having the dimensions stated in 
Sub-clause 5.3, the activity of which is known with an accuracy compatible with that of the measurement to be 
made and is about: 

1.5x10"^ uCi for each face of the source for hand monitors and warning assemblies, 
3x 10~^ ^iCi for foot monitors and warning assemblies 

shall be used to measure the surface contamination response. This source shall be placed in the normal position 
of use as indicated by the manufacturer. 

6.1.2.2 Beta monitors and warning assemblies 

A thin uncoUimated beta emitting reference radioactive source, having the dimensions stated in Sub-clause 5.3, 
the activity of which is known with an accuracy compatible with that of the measurement to be made aud is about: 

1 .5 X 10'^ \xCi for each face of the source for hand monitors or warning assemblies designed for beta emitters of 
maximum energy above 250 keV, 

3x 10~^ jiCi for foot monitors or warning assemblies designed for beta emitters of maximum energy above 
250 keV, 

shall be used to measure the surface contamination response. This source shall be placed in the normal position 
of use as indicated by the manufacturer. 

6.1.3 Precautions and corrections 

a) In the absence of a source haying the dimensions given in Sub-clause 5.3, a source of a smaller area may be 
used. Measurements shall be taken for a sufficient number of positions and the necessary corrections applied to 
obtain comparable accuracy. 

b) In the case where the detector sub-assembly is provided with a protective grill, it should be noted^that the 
characteristics of the sub-assembly depend on the position of the grill in relation to the sensitive area of the 
detector and to the source. 

c) The number of counts shall be such that the statistical uncertainty may be considered negligible in relation 
to the accuracy stated for measurement. 

6.2 Alarm threshold 

The assembly shall be designed to allow the alarm threshold to be set at the levels given in the following table, 
verification of the alarm threshold being a type test. 

Table II 

Alarm threshold levels 



Monitors and warning 

assemblies designed 

for surveying 



One side of the hand 



Both sides 
of the hand 



The sole of the foot 



a above 4 MeV 
fi above 250 keV 
fi below 250 keV 



5.10-4^0 
5-10-3 nCi 



10-3 ^ci 
10-2 nCi 



to be stated 



10-3 ^ci 
10-2 ^ci 



(lEC page 15) 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 

6.3 Uniformity of detector response 

6.3.1 Dependence of response on source position 

The response of the detector to a point source situated on the surface under examination will, in general, vary 
with the position of the source relative to the detector sub-assembly and the transmission of the protective grill. 
The manufacturer shall state : 

a) the variation in response of the detector with source position over the area of the hand or foot as appropriate 
(this information may be given as a diagram), 

b) the transmission of the grill. 

The manufacturer shall indicate the source (e.g. ^^Stj^Y) with which the measurements of points a) and b) have 
been made. 

6.3.2 Maximum permissible value for uniformity error 

(Under consideration, since a conventional but precise definition of uniformity should first be given.) 

6.4 Accuracy of response to the reference radiation 

The accuracy of an assembly characterizes the deviation of the measured results obtained from acceptance tests, 
with respect to the value indicated by the manufacturer according to Sub-clause 6.1. 
The accuracy of an assembly should not be confused with that of the rate meter. 

6.4.1 Mode of expression 

The intrinsic error E, of the indication of the assembly, expressed in % is given by the relationship: 

where ^ 

Sx ~ indicated contamination level ySi may be the mean of several measured values 5i, in accordance with 

Sub-clause 6.1.3 a)), 
5y = conventionally true contamination level. 

6.4.2 Requirements 

The manufacturer shall state the response of the detector sub-assembly asa function of the activity being measured. 
The intrinsic error of an assembly shall not exceed :t30% over the whole range 'of alarm thresholds specified by the 
manufacturer.* 

6.4.3 Method of test * 

The tests shall be performed as described in: 

— Sub-clause 6.1.2.1 for alpha monitors, 

— Sub-clause 6.1.2.2 with one radioactive source only, preferably ®**Sr/®*^Y, for beta monitors. 

The manufacturer shall guarantee that each apparatus will satisfy the requirements of Sub-clause 6.4.2. The 
user may require the test to be carried out on every assembly. 

6.5 Variation of response with radiation energy 

6.5.1 Alpha contamination monitors and warning assemblies 
No specification. 

6.5.2 Beta contamination monitors and warning assemblies 

6.5.2.1 Requirements 

The surface activity response of the assembly shall be measured with a source of ®**Sr/®**Y or ^^^Tl and at least 
three other beta emitters where maximum energies are distributed as follows: 

— one <0.4 MeV, 

— one between 0.4 MeV and 1 MeV, 

— one > 1 .0 MeV: 



* Provided the maximum count rate required is such that the loss due to the finite resolution time of the assembly is less than 10%, 
these tests may be performed by electronic pulse injection of the appropriate count rates. In this case, the form and duration of the 
injected pulses must be similar to those delivered by the detector in response to radiation. 

( lEC page 17) ft 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
lEC Pub 504 ( 1975 ) 

By way of information, a list of suitable radionuclides is given below: 

— ^^C (maximum energy 0.155 MeV). Precautions should be taken when using this radionuclide owing to the 
difficulty of calibration and effects due to self-absorption; 

^- ^^'Pm (maximum energy 0.22 MeV). Precautions should be taken to ensure that contamination from ^^*Pm is 
low enough not to disturb the calibration; 

— ^Co (maximum energy fi,3l MeV). Precautions should be taken when using this radionuclide. The sources used 
should be very thin in order to minimize the emission of secondary electrons due to gamma radiation; 

— 185 W (maximum energy 0.43 MeV); 

— ^*^T1 (maximum energy 0.77 MeV); 

— ^^**Bi (maximum energy 1.17 MeV); 

— ^*Sr (maximum energy 1.46 MeV). Care must be taken to make due allowance for the short half-life of this 
material.' 

The manufacturer shall state: 

a) The radionuclides for which the response as a function of surface contamination has been measured. 

b) The value of the response as a function of the surface contamination for each one of them. 

c) The beta particle energy for which the response is no more than 10% of that obtained with a ^ogj-yMy or ^**^T1 
source if the energy exceeds the maximum beta energy from ^^C, The measurement with ^^Sr/^Y or ^°^T1 shall 
be a routine test. The measurements with other radioactive sources shall be considered as type tests. 



Table III 

Tests performed with variation of influence quantities 



Influence quantity 


Range of values 
of influence quantity 


Li/nits of variation of indication 


Ambient temperature 


Indoor use: 
+ 10 °C to +35 ^C 
Outdoor use * : 
-lO^C to +40^C 
-25 °C to +50^C 


± 10% 

i 20% 
± 50% 


Suppiy voltage U for mains 
operated assemblies 


From 88% U^ to 110% (7^ 


i 10% 


Gamma radiation 


AJpha contamination monitors: 
2.5 mR/h 


20% of the predetermined maximum contamination 
level 

or 
10% of the most sensitive linear range for linear 
scaled assemblies 

or 
10% of the lowest significant decade for logarith- 
mically scaled assemblies 


Beta contamination monitors with- 
out background compensation: 
increase of 50 jiR/h in exposure 
rate 


30% when indication is greater than 50% of full 
scale deflection on the most sensitive range or greater 
than 50% of the least significant decade for logar- 
ithmically scaled assemblies 


Beta contamination monitors with 
background compensation: under 
an exposure rate ^ 500 |iR/h 


50% of full scale deflection on the most sensitive 
range in the case of linearly scaled assemblies or 50% 
of the least significant debade in the case of logar- 
ithmical scales from the indication given with an 
exposure rate lower than 20 jjR/h 



* Assemblies intended for temperate chmates. For hotter or colder climates, different limits may be specified by agreement between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 



( lEC page \9) 



18:11869-1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 

6.5.2.2 Method of test 

The test for the variation of response with beta radiation energy should be carried on with sources of 
dimensions stated in Sub-clause 5.3, whose activity is known with an accuracy compatible with that of the 
measurement to be made. 

The source shall be placed in the normal position of use and the indication noted. 

6.6 Variations in the indications of the assembly 

For each influence quantity taken separately, with the remaining influence quantities maintained withiil the 
ranges given in Table I, a nominal operating range is defined within which the variation in indication shall remain 
within the limits stated by the manufacturer, which hmits shall in no case exceed the values laid down in Table III. 
The variation is determined in relation to the value fixed in the reference conditions. 

These tests are intended as type tests, the fraction of assemblies sampled being fixed by agreement between the 
manufacturer and the user. 



7. Response to other ionizing radiations 

Assemblies shall be designed so as to limit as far as possible the influence of other ionizing radiations. 

7.1 Gamma radiation 

The exposure rates given below may conveniently be provided by a sealed source of ^^'Cs at a minimum distance 
from the assembly to be specified by the manufacturer. 

7.1.1 Requirements 

The response of both alpha and beta contamination measuring assembUes to gamma radiation shall be stated. 
When the assembly is provided with a system to compensate for the presence of gamma radiation, then the type 
of system shall be stated and the upper limit of exposure rate for satisfactory operation of the compensation. 

Such response shall be measured according to the methods given in Sub-clauses 7.1.3 and 7. 1.5 and the resultant 
values should not be greater than those indicated in Sub-clauses 7.1 .2 and 7.1 .4 (also in Table III). 

7. 1 .2 Requirements for alpha contamination monitors 

When the detector is subjected to an exposure rate of 2.5 mR/h, the change in indication shall not exceed 20% 
of the predetermined contamination level, or 10% of the most sensitive range of an assembly with linear scales, 
or 10% of the lowest significant decade for an assembly with logarithmic scales. 

7.1 .3 Method of test for alpha contamination monitors 

Subject the sensitive volume of the detector to a uniform field giving an exposure rate of 2.5 mR/h using a ^^^Cs 
gamma radiation source. Operate the equipment normally and note the indication. 

7 . 1 .4 Requirements for beta contamination monitors 

a) Assemblies without background compensation 

For any level of beta contamination sufficient to give an indication greater than 50% of full-scale deflection 
on the most sensitive range, or 50% of the least significant decade for logarithmic scale assemblies, the indication 
shall not increase by more than 30% of the reading when the instrument is subjected to an increase of 50 ^iR/h 
in ganmia radiation exposure rate. 

b) Assemblies with background compensation 

In the presence of gamma radiation of which the exposure rate does not exceed 500 ^R/h, the indicated 
contamination level for any level of beta contamination equal to or greater than that corresponding to 50% of 
full scale deflection on the most sensitive range, for linearly scaled assemblies, or greater than 50% of the most 
sensitive decade in the case of logarithmically scaled assemblies shall differ by less than 50% from the indication 
given by the same level of beta contamination in the presence of an external exposure rate not exceeding 20 jiR/h. 



(lECpageai) 10 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
lECPnb 504 (1975) 

7.1.5 Method of test 

a) For assemblies without background compensation, in the presence of external gamma radiation whose exposure 
rate is less than 20 ^R/h, expose the detector assembly to a test source of beta radiation whose activity is such 
that it gives dreading grfeater than 50% of the value of the most sensitive range for a linearly scaled assembly 
or 50% of the least significant decade in the case of a logarithmically scaled assembly. Note the count rate 
reading. 

Increase the exposure rate to the assembly by 50 fiR/h using a source of gamma radiation (^^"^Cs) and again note 
the count rate reading. 

Note, — It may be necessary to repeat this test due to statistical fluctuations. 

b) For assemblies with background compensation, set the compensating device for correct operation in the presence 
of a gamma radiation source (see Sub-clause 7.1.1). 

In the presence ofexternal gamma radiation with an exposure rate less than 20 ^xR/h, expose the detector assem- 
bly to a test source of beta radiation of activity as defined in Sub-clause 6.1.2.2. Note the count rate reading. 

Increase up to 500 ^R/h the exposure rate to which the detector is subjected, employing a gamma source (see 
Sub-clause 7.1) placed in the position chosen for the above setting. With the beta source in position, operate 
the instrument in the normal way and note the new count rate which results. 

Note, — If necessary, the beta source may be removed between the two tests. 

7.2 Alpha radiation (for beta contamination measuring assemblies) 

7.2.1 Requirements 

The response of beta contamination measuring assemblies to the reference alpha radiation shall be stated if the 
detector assembly has an equivalent window thickness of less than 5 mg/cm^. 

For the simultaneous alpha/beta contamination measuring assemblies with separate indication of alpha and 
beta contamination, the response of the beta channel to alpha radiation shall be less than — that of the alpha 
channel. 

7.2.2 Method of test 

Insert the hand or foot alpha radiation reference source in the assembly and note the indication. 

7.3 Beta radiation (for alpha contamination measuring assemblies) 

7.3.1 Requirements 

The response of alpha contamination measuring assemblies to the reference beta radiation shall be stated. 
For simultaneous alpha/beta contamination measuring assemblies with separate indication of alpha and beta 
contamination, the response of the alpha channel to beta radiation shall be less than — that of the beta channel. 

7.3.2 Method of test 

Insert the hand or foot beta radiation reference source in the assembly and note the indication. 

7.4 Neutron radiation 

7 .4 . 1 Requirements 

A test for neutron response of the assembly is not mandatory and need to be carried out only if this requirement 
is specified by the user. 

7.4.2 Method of test 

If the test is required, the method shall be subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the user. 

8. Operating characteristics 

8 . 1 Duration of measurement 

The duration of measurement of a measuring assembly depends upon the sensitivity and accuracy required. 
The assembly shall fulfil the requirements of this publication within a total duration of measurement not 
exceeding 15 s, 

11 (lEC page 23) 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 

8.2 Output signals 

A warning shall be provided that operates when the count rate or the count accumulated during a predetermined j 
time corresponds to a degree of contamination below or exceeding some predetermined threshold value. ^ 

The threshold value shall be adjustable and the range of adjustment specified. 

There shall be a visual warning at the end of counting if the count corresponds to a degree of contamination 
below the limit chosen. If the visual warning chosen is coloured, it shall be green. 

There shall be a different visual warning, together with an acoustic warning, if the count corresponds to a degree 
of contamination exceeding the limit chosen. If the visual warning chosen is coloured, it shall be red. 

In the case of an assembly for monitoring the hands, there shall be a separate warning for each hand in the 
case where both hands are monitored simultaneously. 

In the case of mixed alpha-beta probes, a supplementary indication shall show which type of contamination is 
involved. 

Apart from the warnings described above, it is recommended that a special warning should be provided to show 
if there is a fault on the assembly. 



8.3 Statistical fluctuations 
8.3.1 Requirements 

Because of the random nature of the emission of alpha and beta radiation, the indication of a contamination 
measuring assembly may exhibit fluctuations about its mean value. 

The coefficient of variation of the contamination indication shall be less than the following values: 

a) For assemblies without background compensation. 

For linear scales: 

20% for any contamination level exceeding that corresponding to one-third of the scale maximum on the most 

sensitive range. 

For non-Unear scales: 

20% for any contamination level exceeding that corresponding to three times that corresponding to the lowest 

significant graduation on the scale. 

b) For assembhes with background compensation. 

The above values shall apply for any external ganuna radiation exposure rates less than 20 |iR/h. The above 
values may be increased to 35% for a gamma exposure rate of 500 ^iR/h. 



8.3.2 Method of test 

Insert an appropriate alpha or beta source in the assembly of activity sufficient to give an indication between 
one-third and one-half of the total deviation (linear scale) or the lowest decade (logarithmic scale). 

Take a series of at least 10 readings in accordance with Sub^clause 5.4. After this, the mean value of all the readings 
and the corresponding coefficient of variation is found. This coefficient shall lie within the limits of Sub-clause 8.3.1. 



8.4 Overload protection 

For radiation intensities greater than that corresponding to full-scale deflection, the indication of the assembly 
should be out of scale at the higher end of the scale range and then shall remain so. For assemblies with more than 
one scale range, this requirement shall apply to each scale range. 

Compliance with this requirement is tested by submitting the assembly to an intensity of at least 100 times that 
required to produce full-scale deflection for 5 min. 

(rECpage25) 12 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
l£CPab 504 (1975) 

9. Mechanical characteristics 

Although these assemblies are used in a fixed place, they should be designed to be mobile and transportable by 
hand by two persons. This goyerns their bulk and weight. 

It shall be possible to carry out the operating tests without moving or dismantling the assembly, which means 
that from the front face or a side face there should be free accessibility to all the controls and settings of the elec- 
tronic sub-assembly. Access to controls and settings shall be permitted only to authorized persons. Operating 
tests shall also be possible to verify the correct functioning of the electronic sub-assembly (e.g. background noise 
below a pre-determined level), and of the assembly as a whole, by means of a reference source. 

9.1 Contamination checking devices 

a) Monitors and warning assemblies for the hands 

The checking device should comprise at least: 

— two detectors facing one another for checking both sides of one hand, or 

— two detectors placed side by side for checking one side of both hands. 

Under these conditions, checking the contamination of both sides of both hands comprises at the most two 
operations. 

The area to which the detectors are sensitive should be at least 12 cmx20 cm, and the detectors should be 
freely accessible for decontamination. 

b) Monitors and warning assemblies for the feet 

The contamination checking device may have only one detector. The minimum area to which the detector(s) 
is (are) sensitive shall be 15 cm X 35 cm. 

Under these conditions, checking the contamination of both feet comprises at the most two operations. 
Assemblies intended for checking both feet simultaneously should have either two detectors as specified above 
or one sensitive to a source of area 30 cm X 35 cm. 

To avoid contamination of the counter surface and deposit of miscellaneous foreign matter, the surface of 
the detector should be protected by means of a foil of protective material as thin as practical. This foil shall be 
changed periodically to avoid an increase in background noise; this operation can be facilitated by having a 
reserve reel of a foil mounted on the apparatus. It is recommended that the unreeling of the foil and the posi- 
tioning of a clean portion should be effected by means of a pedal, 

9.2 Initiation of counting 

The counting operation shall be started automatically by placing the hand(s) or the foot (feet) in the proper 
counting position. 

Indication should be given if the hand(s) is (are) moved from the correct position before the counting period is 
complete. On replacing the hand(s) in the correct position, the reading obtained should be cancelled and the counting 
period recommenced. 

9.3 Installation 

The detector(s) of assemblies for checking contamination of the hands should be placed at a height of about 
1 .20 m. The probe of an assembly for checking contamination of the feet shall be placed either at floor level or at 
a height not exceeding 25 cm. 



10. Power supply 

10.1 Mains operation 

Mains operated assemblies shall be designed to operate from single-phase supply voltage in one of the following 
categories, in accordance with national standards: 

— Category 1 127 and /or 220 V; 

— Category 2 120 and/or 240 V. 

13 (lECpage27) 



IS : 11869 - 1987 
lEC Pub 504 (1975) 

The assemblies shall be capable of operating from mains with a supply voltage tolerance of + 10% and —12% 
and a supply frequency of 60 i 1 Hz or 50 ± 1 Hz (nominal single-phase power in the U.S.A. is 117 V and/or 
234 V, 60 Hz; nominal single-phase power of 110 V, 50 Hz is an additional standard in the United Kingdom). 

10.2 Mains operation test 

Expose the detector to appropriate sources of radiation of sufficient activity to give a count rate corresponding 
to approximately 2/3 full-scale deflection on the most and on the least sensitive range for a linearly scaled assem- 
bly, or of the extreme decades for a logarithmically scaled assembly. With the supply voltage at its nominal 
value I7n, take in each case the mean of ten consecutive readings of count rate. 

Take in each case the mean of ten consecutive readings with the supply voltage 10% above the nominal value 
and the mean of ten consecutive readings with the supply voltage 12% below the nominal value. These mean 
values shall not differ from those obtained with nominal supply voltage by more than ± 10%. 

It may be necessary to repeat this test due to statistical fluctuations in the indications, 

10.3 Battery operation 

Since these assemblies are intended for operation in a fixed place, they are normally mains-driven. Nevertheless, 
an emergency supply should be provided in case of a mains failure. 

11. Storage 

All assemblies designed for use in temperate regions shall be designed to operate within the specifications of this 
publication following storage (or transport) without batteries for a period of at least three months in the 
manufacturer's packaging at any temperature between — 25 °C and + 50 °C. In certain circumstances, more 
severe specifications may be required, such as capability for withstanding air transport at low ambient pressure. 

12. Certificate 

A certificate shall accompany each assembly, giving at least the following information: * 

— Manufacturer's name or registered trade mark, 

— Type of the assembly and serial number, 

— Graduation of the scale, 

— Scale limits for each measuring range, 

— Surface contamination response, 

— Response as a function of radiation energy, 

— Dependence of response on source position, 

— Location and dimensions of the sensitive volume, 

— Materials of the wall between the source and the sensitive volume of the detector and surface mass of each of 
them (in mg/cm^), 

— Minimum energy of the beta particles that can be detected. 



* See I EC Publication 278, Documentation to be supplied with Electronic Measuring Apparatus. 



(IECpagc29 14 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, Ind 



