**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 14546 (2009) : Acoustics - Measureement of Airborne Sound 
Emitted by Vessels on Inland Waterways and Harbours [TED 
18: Inland, Harbour Crafts and Fishing Vessels] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14546 : 2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 



( WW ^mr ) 

Indian Standard 

ACOUSTICS — MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE 

SOUND EMITTED BY VESSELS ON INLAND 

WATERWAYS AND HARBOURS 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 17.040.30 



©BIS 2009 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELH1 110002 

October 2009 Price Group 5 



Inland Harbour Crafts and Fishing Vessels Sectional Committee, TED 1 8 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with ISO 2922 : 2000 'Acoustics — IVIeasurement 
of airborne sound emitted by vessels on inland waterways and harbours' issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation 
of the Inland Harbour Crafts and Fishing Vessels Sectional Committee and approval of the Transport Engineering 
Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1 998. In this revision, conditions for obtaining measurement results of 
the airborne sound emitted by vessels, have been made exhaustive and elaborative. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is 
particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as 
'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard while in Indian Standards, 
the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marl<er. 

In this adopted standard reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards 
also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards, which are to be substituted in their places, are given below 
along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 



International Standard 

I EC 60942 : 1997 Electroacoustics- 
Sound calibrators 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

IS 15059 : 2001 Electroacoustics 
Sound calibrators 



Degree of Equivalence 
Identical 



IEC61260 : 1995 Electroacoustics — 
Octave-band and fractional-octave- 
band filters 



IS 6964 : 2001 Electroacoustics — 
Octave-band and fractional-octave- 
band filters (first revision) 



do 



lEC 61672-1 : 2002 Electroacoustics 
— Sound level meters — Part 1: 
Specifications 



IS 15575 (Part 1) : 2005 
Electroacoustics — Sound level meters: 
Part 1 Specifications 



do 



For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1 960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14546 :2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

Indian Standard 

ACOUSTICS — MEASUREMENT OF AIRBORNE 

SOUND EMITTED BY VESSELS ON INLAND 

WATERWAYS AND HARBOURS 

( First Revision ) 

1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies the conditions for obtaining reproducible and comparable measurement 
results of the airborne sound emitted by vessels of all kinds on inland waterways and in ports and harbours, except 
powered recreational craft as specified in ISO 14509. This International Standard is applicable to small sea-going 
vessels, harbour vessels, dredgers, and all watercraft including non-displacement craft, used or capable of being 
used as a means of transport on water. 

2 Normative references 

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this International Standard. For dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these 
publications do not apply. However, parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. For 
undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. Members of ISO and I EC 
maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. 

I EC 60942, Electroacoustics — Sound calibrators. 

I EC 61 260, Electroacoustics — Octave-band and fractional-octave-band filters. 

I EC 61 672-1 , Electroacoustics — Sound level meters — Part 1: Specifications.^^ 

3 Terms and definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following terms and definitions apply. 

3.1 

acceptance test for vessels 

acceptance test 

measurement performed to prove that the sound emitted by the vessel, stationary or in motion, as delivered by the 
manufacturer, complies with noise specifications or prescribed limits 

3.2 

monitoring test for vessels 

monitoring test 

measurement performed in order to check that the sound emitted by the vessel, stationary or in motion, is still 
within prescribed limits and that no noticeable changes have occurred since the acceptance on initial delivery or 
after modification, as applicable 



1) To be published. (Revision of lEC 60651 and lEC 60804) 



IS 14546 :200g 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

3.3 

maximum AS-weighted sound pressure level for vessels 

maximum AS-weighted sound pressure level 

^pASmax 

maximum sound pressure level achieved from measurement during the passage of the vessel under specified 
operating conditions measured with frequency weighting A and with time weighting S according to lEC 61672-1 

NOTE It is expressed in decibels (dB). 

3.4 

A-weighted sound exposure 

^A 

time integral of squared, instantaneous, A-weighted sound pressure over a stated time interval or event 

NOTE 1 It is expressed in pascal-squared seconds (Pa^ s). 

NOTE 2 In symbols, the A-weighted sound exposure, E;^, of a specified event (e.g. the passage of a craft) is represented by 

E/K Pa t)^t 
h 

where pa^(0 is the squared, instantaneous, A-weighted sound pressure as a function of running time t for an integration time 
starting at t^ and ending at f2 (see 11.1.1). 

3.5 

A-weighted sound exposure level 

^A£ 

ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of an A-weighted sound exposure, Ef^, to the reference sound 
exposure, ^q, given by the product of the square of the reference sound pressure of p^ = 20 ^iPa and the sound 
exposure reference duration of Tq = 1 s, (^q = pq^ • Tq = 4 x 1 0"''° Pa^s) 

NOTE 1 It is expressed in decibels (dB). 

NOTE 2 In symbols, the A-weighted sound exposure level, La£, of a specified event (e.g. the passage of a vessel) with the 
duration T= t2-t^, is related to a corresponding measurement of the time-averaged A-weighted sound pressure level, LpAeq.r- 
by 



-A£ 



10 Ig 






PqTq 



dB = 10lg 



dB = L 



pAeqJ 



lOlg 



'oj 



dB 



where pA2(f) is the squared, instantaneous, A-weighted sound pressure as a function of running time t. 

NOTE 3 The A-weighted sound exposure level La£ is arithmetically identical to the single-event sound pressure level L^ js 
(reference duration Jq = 1 s) as, for example, defined in ISO 3744. 

NOTE 4 The abbreviation "SEL" is sometimes used for the single-event sound pressure level, Z.p^is- 

NOTE 5 In this International Standard, the sound exposure level is to characterize the emission of the source and not the 
noise impact on people exposed to the sound. 



IS 14546 : 2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

3.6 

background noise for vessels 

background noise 

noise from all sources other than the craft under test 

EXAMPLE Noise from waves splashing on the measuring craft or the shore, other craft or equipment, and wind effects. 

4 Measurement quantities 

4.1 Frequency weighting A shall be used for all measurements. 

4.2 Care should be taken to avoid any influence on the result from unwanted sound signals, for example noise 
from wind on the microphone of the measuring equipment, electrical interference, or extraneous sound sources not 
under consideration. 

4.3 The quantities to be determined at all microphone positions in acceptance and monitoring tests are the 
A-weighted sound exposure level, L^^ received from the operation of vessel and the maximum AS-weighted sound 
pressure level, i-pASmax' both expressed in decibels. 

4.4 If, in addition to the sound exposure level, spectral analysis in acceptance tests or determination of some 
special acoustical characteristics of vessels is needed, the quantities to be measured are the unweighted or 
C-frequency weighted, octave-band or one-third-octave-band S-time weighted sound pressure levels in decibels at 
the time of maximum sound pressure, or the unweighted or C-frequency weighted, octave-band or one-third- 
octave-band sound exposure levels in decibels. 

4.5 When measurements are made at some distance from the source, the levels observed may be considerably 
affected by the weather conditions. For example, the attenuation of sound due to air absorption is affected by the 
temperature and humidity of the air. In addition the refraction of sound waves due to wind and temperature 
gradients will affect the levels received at a particular position. It is recommended that measurements taken in 
extreme or atypical conditions be avoided. If possible, a value obtained under typical climatic conditions, and an 
indication of the range of values obtained under other climatic conditions, should be included in the test report. 

4.6 For steady-state noise, as that from a stationary ship's engine, the quantity to be measured is the time- 
averaged A-weighted sound pressure level, i^Aeq- 

5 Measurement uncertainty 

Table 1 lists the likely sources of uncertainty and estimates of the standard deviation associated with each based 
on experience. These sources of uncertainty are considered to be independent for each measurement type. 
Therefore, the estimated total standard uncertainty is given by the square root of the sum of the squares of the 
individual standard deviations contained in Table 1 . 



IS 14546 :2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 



Table 1 — Standard deviation of reproducibility 



Values in decibels 



Individual sources of uncertainty 


IVIaximum AS- 

weighted sound 

pressure level 

^ASmax 


Individual standard deviations 

A-weighted sound Time-averaged A- 
exposure level weighted sound 
La£ pressure level at 
25 m 

^pAeq 


Time-averaged A- 

weighted sound 

pressure level at 

1 m 

^pAeq 


Distance effects 


0,25 


0,15 


0,0 


1,0 


IVIeasuring equipment 


1,0 


0,7 


0,7 


0,7 


Sound propagation conditions 


1,5 


1,2 


1,2 


0,0 


Waves, currents and tides 


1,5 


1,5 


0,0 


0,0 


Operator(s) effects 


0,2 


0,2 


0,1 


0,1 


Test site variations 


1,0 


1,0 


1,5 


1,0 


Operating conditions 


0,5 


0,5 


0,5 


0,5 


Estimated total standard uncertainty 


2,6 


2,3 


2,1 


1,7 



6 Measuring equipment 

6.1 Equipment specifications 

The instrumentation system, including microphones and cables (which shall be used according to the 
manufacturer's specifications), and including the windscreen recommended by the manufacturer and the overall 
electroacoustic performance of any additional measuring equipment, including for example a tape recorder and/or 
level recorder, shall meet the requirements for a type 1 instrument specified in lEC 61672-1 . 

NOTE Sound level meters witli "maximum hold" capabilities are preferred to measure the maximum S-time weighted 

sound pressure level. 

When a tape recorder is used for the measurements, the dynamic range of the instrumentation shall be consistent 
with the measured signal. 

For the measurement of noise spectra the filters shall correspond to lEC 61260, class 1. 

A wind speed anemometer which is accurate to within 1 % shall be used. 

An engine speed tachometer which is accurate to within 50 r/min shall be used. 

6.2 Windscreen 

A suitable windscreen shall be used to reduce the influence of wind on the reading. When it can be expected that 
the wind-induced signal will be within 10 dB of the average sound level induced by the vessel under investigation, 
windscreens shall be used which, together with the sound level meter, meet the requirements of lEC 61672-1. 

6.3 Equipment calibration 

A sound calibrator which meets the requirements of lEC 60942 shall be used. 

The overall acoustic performance of the measurement equipment shall be checked with the sound calibrator, 
according to the manufacturer's instructions, at the beginning and at the end of each series of measurements and 
at least at the beginning and end of each measurement day. 



IS 14546 :2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

At intervals of no longer than 2 years, the sound level meter shall undergo laboratory verification for compliance 
with lEC 61 672-1 . The date of the last verification of the compliance with lEC 61 672-1 shall be recorded. 

The sound calibrator used for calibration of the sound level meter shall undergo laboratory verification every year, 
with traceability to a primary standards laboratory. 

7 Test site specifications and environmental conditions 

7.1 Test conditions 

Two classes of test conditions are considered, namely 

when the vessel is under way, the requirements of 7.2.1 , 7.3 and 7.4 shall apply; 

when the vessel is alongside a wharf or at anchor, the requirements of 7.2.2, 7.3, 7.4 and 7.5 shall apply. 

7.2 Test site specifications 

7.2.1 Moving vessels 

Within 30 m around the vessel under test and the microphone, there shall be no large surfaces (e.g. retaining walls, 
building fagades, rocks, bridges) from which sound can be reflected back to the microphone. 

In the vicinity of the microphone, there shall be no obstacles which could disturb the sound field. Therefore, no 
person shall be between the microphone and the sound source, and any observers shall be in such a position that 
any influence on the meter reading is avoided. 

The area between the vessel under test and the measurement microphone shall be open water, free from any 
sound absorbing or sound reflecting objects. 

7.2.2 Stationary vessels 

The surroundings of the microphone up to 30 m shall be free of large, sound-reflecting objects like barriers, hills, 
rocks, bridges or buildings. 

7.3 Environmental conditions 

7.3.1 At wind velocities above 7 m/s, the sound propagation may be disturbed and measurements shall not be 
performed. 

7.3.2 Tests shall be avoided in conditions of rain or other precipitation and/or when wave motion or surf is too 
high for the size of vessel under test. 

7.4 Background noise 

7.4.1 Acceptance tests 

The maximum AS-weighted sound pressure level, the A-weighted sound exposure level and/or the time-averaged 
sound pressure level due to other noise sources (e.g. waves splashing on the measuring boat or ashore, other 
vessels, local industry or other machinery) and due to wind shall be at least lOdB below the maximum 
AS-weighted sound pressure level, the A-weighted sound exposure level and/or the time-averaged sound pressure 
level of the sound of the vessel. 

If the noise is frequency analysed, the difference shall be at least 10 dB in the required octave or one-third-octave 
bands. 



IS 14546 :200g 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

7.4.2 Monitoring tests 



7.4.2.1 Correction for L^ASmax a"d for L^Aeq 



The ipASmax a^cl/or the i^Aeq °f ^^^ background noise shall be at least 6 dB below the corresponding reading 
obtained during the passage of the vessel (for i^,ASmax) and/or during the measurment period (for ipAeq)- '^^^ 
readings shall then be corrected according to Table 2. 

7.4.2.2 Correction for Lae 

The La£ of the background noise is given in terms of the background ipAeq- 

^A£ (back) = -^pAeq (back) + 1 '9 (T/'^ s) dB 
where T is the integration time used to calculate for Lae- 

The La£ of t'^o background noise shall be at least 6 dB below the corresponding reading obtained during the 
passage of the vessel. The reading shall then be corrected according to Table 2. 



Table 2 — Correction for bacltground sound pressure level, L'^as. for monitoring tests 

Values in decibels 



Correction to be applied to the reading of the maximum 
AS-weighted sound pressure level, the A-weighted 
sound exposure level^ and/or the A-weighted time- 
averaged sound pressure level'^ 



Difference between the maximum AS-weighted sound 

pressure level, the A-weighted sound exposure level^ 

and/or the A-weighted time-averaged sound pressure 

level'^ and the corresponding quantities for the 

background noise 



10 



6 to 9 



^ Both obtained during the passage of the vessel. 
^ Obtained during the measurement period. 



7.5 Measurements on stationary vessels 

For tests taken when the vessel is moored or alongside a wharf or fitting-out basin, etc., it may be impossible to 
obtain a distance of 30 m from large reflecting surfaces. Where this occurs, details on the test location shall be 
included in the report. 

NOTE 1 Measurements taken at a specific location in such conditions will refer only to that particular location and no 
correlation should necessarily be inferred for noise measurement taken at another berth. 

NOTE 2 The sound from moored vessels measured on land could be significantly affected by the form of the wharf to which 
the vessel is moored. High, solid wharves could provide considerable shielding to an extent governed by, say the state of the 
tide. 



8 Test course and measurement of distance 

8.1 At the test course, the depth of water shall be sufficient for normal operation of the vessel. 

8.2 During the test, the course of the vessel shall be as straight as possible at the distance from the microphone 
specified in clause 10. 



IS 14546 :2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

8.3 Vessels being tested on inland waterways shall run either against the current or tide or in slack water. 
However, as specified in 11 .1 .2 the noisier side shall be measured. 

NOTE This requirement may necessitate waiting for a suitable tide. 

8.4 The distance between the microphone and the side of the vessel shall be measured with an accuracy of 
1 m by optical means, for example by range-finders or photographic techniques, unless this distance is measured 

by running the vessel on a prescribed course past a microphone placed in a prescribed position. In this latter case, 
permanent test sites with appropriate direction markers are recommended. 

9 Operating conditions 

9.1 Distance from microphone 

The test run shall start at a sufficient distance from the microphone to obtain stabilized engine conditions when 
passing the microphone, with the vessel proceeding against any current or tide. 

9.2 Loading condition 

The loading condition of the vessel, the quantity, type and stowage of cargo, as well as the draught of the vessel, 
shall be stated in the test report. For small craft, the disposition of masses, including the number and seating of 
persons, shall be recorded. For acceptance tests, the vessel shall be at minimum loading. 

9.3 Main engines 

9.3.1 During the tests, the main engines shall run at 95 % or more of their rated speed or at a nominal number of 
revolutions of the propellers according to the specifications in the contract clauses for the vessel's acceptance or, in 
the case of a commissioned vessel, at the maximum continuous rate of engine revolutions. 

9.3.2 For a stationary vessel, with measurements at selected places, the propulsion machinery shall be stopped 
if this is normal for harbour conditions. 

9.4 Auxiliary engines 

All auxiliary engines and equipment necessary for continuous service and normal operation shall run at their normal 
speed and normal load. 

9.5 Doors and windows 

During acceptance tests, measurements shall first be performed with windows and doors of the engine rooms shut. 
The sound pressure level with the windows and doors of the engine rooms open shall be stated separately. 

9.6 Monitoring tests 

During monitoring tests, the vessel shall run under normal sailing conditions. Windows and doors of the engine 
rooms shall be open if this is usual during normal operating conditions. 

10 Microphone position 

10.1 The microphone shall be positioned at 3,5 m 0,5 m above the water surface and, if mounted on a solid 
surface, shall be positioned at least 1 ,2 m above that surface. The microphone shall be positioned within 0,5 m of 
the edge of the surface above which it is mounted. 



IS 14546 :200g 
ISO 2922 : 2000 

10.2 When the vessel passes the microphone, the distance between the side of the vessel and the microphone 
shall be 25 m 5 m. 

NOTE Depending on the directivity of sound radiation, the highest indication of the sound level meter might not occur when 

the vessel is at its closest point. For this reading the distance might be more than 25 m. 

10.3 If the point of closest approach between the microphone and the vessel deviates from the reference distance 
of 25 m, the results shall be corrected according to 1 1 .1 .4. 

10.4 For the measurement of sound emitted by vessels at anchor, such as dredgers, salvage vessels, diving 
vessels, the microphones shall be placed 25 m 2 m from the side and at several points around the vessel. 
Machinery on board the vessel shall be run at the normal speed used when the vessel is at anchor or working and 
with normal load. 

10.5 When measuring the sound pressure levels at the intake and exhaust of the engine or the air-conditioning 
and cooling system, it is recommended that the microphone be placed outside the gas stream at a distance of 1 m 
from the edge of the intake or exhaust opening, at an angle of 30° to the direction of the gas stream, and as far as 
possible from reflecting surfaces. 

11 Test procedure 

11.1 Moving vessels 

11.1.1 Measure the sound exposure level of each individual pass-by from the time at which the sound of the 
approaching vessel is first heard above the background noise until the time that the sound from the departing 
vessel fades into the background noise. The maximum AS-weighted sound pressure level indicated during the 
passage of the vessel shall also be measured. For this latter measurement, ignore any maximum level which is 
obviously out of character with the general sound pressure level being read. 

NOTE In practice the exact start and finish of the sound exposure level measurement is not critical provided that the 

measurement period covers the highest 10 dB of the sound from the passage of the vessel. 

11.1.2 For acceptance tests, make at least two passages. Round the sound exposure levels and the arithmetic 
mean value of the sound pressure level to the nearest integral decibel. 

If the sound radiation of the vessel is obviously asymmetrical with respect to the longitudinal axis of the vessel, then 
measurement shall be performed at the side with the higher sound pressure level. 

The spread between the results of sound exposure measurements made during the two passages shall not be 
larger than 3 dB, otherwise a new series of measurements shall be made. 

11.1.3 For monitoring tests, slight deviation from the test conditions specified for acceptance tests may be 
tolerated with respect to the test site, the background noise, the distance between the microphone and the vessel, 
and the operating conditions. For example, the number of measurement positions and the number of engine 
operating conditions may be reduced. 

11.1.4 If the distance d between the microphone and the side of the vessel at its closest approach deviates from 
the reference value of 25 m, the A-weighted sound exposure level, Lf^^^, measured at a distance d and the 
maximum AS-weighted sound pressure level, ipASmax.rf' rneasured at a distance d shall be corrected according to 
the following relationship to obtain the A-weighted sound exposure level, iA£'25' f°'' the reference distance 25 m 
and the maximum AS-weighted sound pressure level, i-ASmax25' f°'' ^^e reference distance 25 m: 

^A£,25 = ^kE4 + k\Q[d /(25m)] dB 



8 



IS 14546 :200g 
ISO 2922 : 2000 



where 



^ = 20forLpASmax; 
^ = 1 for L^£.. 

11.1.5 The presence of clearly audible tones or noise of a distinctly impulsive character shall be stated in the test 
report. 

11.2 Stationary vessels 

The ipAeq °f ^ complete vessel and/or specific component in accordance with 10.4 and 10.5, respectively, shall be 
measured for a period of at least 30 s. 

The presence of clearly audible tones or noise of a distinctly impulsive character shall be stated in the test report. 

1 2 Test report 

The test report shall include the following: 

a) a reference to this International Standard; 

b) the nature of the tests; 

c) the test site, water conditions, meteorological conditions, (including temperature, barometric pressure and wind 
velocity); for measurements on stationary vessels, give details of the test location if it was impossible to obtain 
a distance of 30 m from large reflecting surfaces (see 7.5); 

d) the measuring equipment used, together with the date of the last verification of the compliance with 
lEC 61672-1; 

e) the level of the maximum AS-weighted background sound pressure level and the A-weighted background 
sound exposure level; 

f) the vessel, its main engines, the engine and shaft speeds during the test, and the setting of controllable-pitch 
or Voith-Schneider propellers; 

g) the auxiliary engines and equipment and their operating conditions; 

h) the loading of the vessel, the quantity, type and stowage of cargo, as well as the draught of the vessel; for 
small craft, the disposition of masses, including the number and seating of persons; 

i) the microphone position; 

j) the A-weighted sound exposure levels iA£,25 ^"d ^a^.^^ ^"d the maximum AS-weighted sound pressure levels 
LpASmax,25 ^"^ ^pASmax,^ ^""^^ f°'' measurements on stationary vessels, the time-averaged A-weighted sound 
pressure level, i^Aeq' ^""^^ optionally, the sound spectrum; if possible, a value obtained under typical climatic 
conditions and an indication of the range of values obtained under other climatic conditions should be included 
in the test report (see 4.5); 

k) the presence of clearly audible tones or noise of a distinctly impulsive character; 

I) whether the windows and doors of the engine room were open or shut; 

m) special details on test location and engine operation according to 7.5, 9.3.2 and 10.5; 

n) special details on microphone placement according to 10.5. 



IS 14546 :2009 
ISO 2922 : 2000 



Bibliography 



[1] ISO 3744, Acoustics — Determination of sound power levels of noise sources using sound pressure — 
Engineering method in an essentially free field over a reflecting plane. 

[2] ISO 12001, Acoustics — Noise emitted by machinery and equipment — Rules for the drafting and 
presentation of a noise code. 

[3] ISO 1 4509, Small craft — Measurement of airborne sound emitted by powered recreational craft. 



10 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution establislned under tiie Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
iiarmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of the these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard alongwith amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 18 (609). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 



Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Northern 



Southern 



Western 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T Scheme VII M, V.I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700054 

SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 
C.I.T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



Telephones 

2323 7617 
2323 3841 



2337 8499, 2337 8561 
2337 8626,2337 9120 



260 3843 
[ 260 9285 



2254 1216,2254 1442 
2254 2519,2254 2315 

2832 9295, 2832 7858 
2832 7891,2832 7892 



Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Published by BIS, New Delhi 



