**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12373-4 (1993) : Basic reference model of open systems 
interconnection for information processing systems. Part 4: 
Management framework [LITD 14: Software and System 
Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12373 (Part4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 

rv ( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

BASIC REFERENCE MODEL OF OPEN SYSTEMS 

INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 

PART 4 MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 



UDC 68r327-801 



©BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

M^rchySBZ Price Group 5 



Computer Systems and Interconnection Sectional Committee, LTD 36 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/IEC 7498-4:1989 'Information processing 
systems — Open systems Interconnection — Basic reference model — Part 4 : Management 
framework', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Computer Systems and inter- 
connection Sectional Committee ( LTD 36 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunica- 
tion Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those 
used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

In this Indian Standard, the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their 
respective place the followmg: 

International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard 

ISO 7498 : 1984 Information processing systems— IS 12373 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 Basic reference 
Open systems interconnection — Basic reference model of open systems interconnection 

model for information processing systems: 

Part 1 ( Identical ) 

ISO 7498-3 : 1989 Information processing IS 12373 ( Part 2 ) : 1993 Basic reference 

systems — Open systems interconnection — model of open systems interconnection 

Basic reference model — Part 2 : Security for information processing systems: 

architecture Part 2 Security architecture ( Identical) 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting 
it in this standard. 



IS 12373 ( Part 4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



Indian Standard 

BASIC REFERENCE MODEL OF OPEN SYSTEMS 

INTERCONNECTION FOR INFORMATION 

PROCESSING SYSTEMS 

PART 4 MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 



1 Scope 

This part of ISO/IEC 7498 establishes a framework for 
coordinating the development of existing and future standards 
for OSI K/lanagement, and is provided for reference by those 
standards. js 

It 

a) defines terminology of and describes concepts for OSI 
Management; 

b) provides a structure for OSI Management together 
with an overview of the objectives of and facilities provided 
by OSI Management; and 

c) describes OSI Management activities. 

This part of ISO/IEC 7498 does not specify services or 
protocols for OSI Management. It is neither an implementation 
specification for systems, nor a basis for appraising the 
conformance of implementations. 



2 Normative references 

The following standards contain provisions which, through 
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of 
ISO/IEC 7498. At the time of publication, the editions indi- 
cated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and 
parties to agreements based on this part of ISO/IEC 7498 are 
encouraged to investigate the possibi!i^y of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below. Members of lEC 
and ISO maintain registers of currently valid International 
Standards. 

iSO/iEC 7498:1984, Information processing systems - Gpen 
Systems Interconnection - Basic Reference Mode/. 

ISO/IEC 7498-2: 1 988, Information processing systems - Open 
Systems interconnection - Basic Reference Model - Part 2: 
Security Architecture. 



3 Definitions and abbreviations 

3.1 This part of ISO/IEC 7498 makes use of the OS! 
terminology defined in ISO/IEC 7498, specifically: 

a) (N)-entity 

b) (N)-iayer 

c) (N)-protocol 

d) (N)-protocoi-data-unit 

e) open system 

f) systems management 



3.2 Terms defined in ISO/IEC 7498 which are redefined for 
the purposes of this part of ISO/IEC 7498: 

3.2.1 Systems management application-entity: An 

application-entity for the purpose of systems management 
communication. 



3.3 For the purpose of this part of ISO/iEC 7498, the 
following definitions apply: 

3.3.1 OSI Management: The facilities to control, co- 
ordinate and monitor the resources which allow communica- 
tions to take place in the OSI Environment. 

3.3.2 {N)-layer operation: The monitoring and control of 
a single instance of communication. 

3.3.3 Managed object: The OSI Management view of a 
resource within the OSI Envii'onment that may be managed 
through the use of OSI Management protocols). 

3.3.4 Management information Base: The conceptual 
repository of management information within an open system. 



IS 12373 ( Part 4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



3.4 Abbreviations 

MIB Management Infornnation Base 

0S( open systems interconnection 

OSIE OSI environment 

PDU protocol-data-unit 

SMAE systems management application-entity 

4 Concepts in OSI Management 

4.1 Users' requirements of OSI Management 

Recognising the need for interconnection services which wii) 
carry information in a reliable and economic manner, OSI 
Management supports the users' needs for 

a) activities which enable managers to plan, organise, 
supervise, control and account for the use of interconnec- 
tion services; 

b) the ability to respond to changing requirements; 

c) facilities to ensure predictable communications 
behaviour; and 

d) facilities which provide for information protection and 
for the authentication of sources of and destinations for 
transmitted data. 

The management tools which provide this support may vary 
in complexity depending upon the users' requirements. Such 
tools may operate locally or co-operate across a number of 
open systems. OSI Management does not constrain the user 
interface. 

4.2 The OSI Management environment 

The OSI Management environment is that subset of the total 
OSI environment (OSIE) which is concerned with the tools 
and services needed to nionitor, control and coordinate 
interconnection activities. The OSI Management environment 
includes both the capability for managers to gather informa- 
tion and to exercise control, and the capability to maintain an 
awareness of and report on the status of resources in the 
OSIE. 

The individual open systems within the OSIE may have 
aspects of management responsibility delegated to them. The 
responsibility may be manifest in terms of 

a) autonomous management of the open system; and 

b) co-operation with other open systems, through the 
exchange of information, to perform coordinated manage- 
ment activities. 

This management responsibility is directed at individual 
resources, each of which may operate with a degree of 
independence from other resources. This management 
responsibility may be further extended to co-ordinate and 
control sets of resources to increase functionality and per- 
forrpance. 



4.3 Managed objects, their attributes and oper- 
ations 

A m'anaged object is the OSI Management view of a resource 
within the OSIE that is subject to management, such as a 
layer entity, a connection or an item of physical communica- 
tions equipment. Thus a managed object is the abstracted 
view of such a resource that represents its properties as seen 
by (and for the purposes of) management. 

A managed object is defined in terms of attributes it pos- 
sesses, operations that may be performed upon it, notifica- 
tions that it may issue and its relationships with other man- 
aged objects. This is distinct from, but related to, any defini- 
tion or specification of the resource represented by the 
managed object as an element of the OSIE. 

The set of managed objects within a system, together with 
their attributes, constitutes that system's Management Infor- 
mation Base (MIB). 



4.4 Management 
systems 



relationships between open 



The users' requirements for OSI Management may be met 
either by local operations or by the communication of 
information between open systems, or by both. OSI Manage- 
ment is achieved between open systems through co-operation 
between one or more components of the management activity 
taking a managing role and others taking a managed role. 
The role played by a particular system may be static or may 
change over time, and may depend upon the particular 
management communication. 

OSI Management information flow between open systems is 
defined in terms of operations and notifications. 



4.5 OSI Management functional areas 

4.5.1 Introduction 

OSI Management is required for a number of purposes. 
These requirements are categorized into a number of func- 
tional areas 

a) fault management (see 4.5.2); 

b) accounting management (see 4.5.3); 

c) configuration management (see 4.5.4); 

d) performance management (see 4.5.5); and 

e) security management (see 4.5.6). 

Specific management functions, within these functional areas, 
are provided by OSI Management mechanisms. Many of the 
mechanisms are general in the sense that they are used to 
fulfil requ'nements In more than one functional area. Similarly, 
managed objects are general in the sense that they may be 
common to more than one functional area. 

Each of these functional areas is described briefly below. The 
lists of functions are not necessarily exhaustive. 



IS 12373 (Part 4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 ; 1989 



4.5.2 Fault management 

Fault management encompasses fault detection, isolation and 
the correction of abnormal operation of the OS! Environment. 
Faults cause open systems to fail to meet their operational 
objectives and they may be persistent or transient. Faults 
manifest themselves as particular events (e.g. errors) in the 
operation of an open system. Error detection provides a 
capability to recognise faults. Fault management includes 
functions to 

a) maintain and examine error logs; 

b) accept and act upon error detection notifications; 

c) trace and identify faults; 

d) carry out sequences of diagnostic tests; and 

e) correct faults. 

4.5.3 Accounting management 

Accounting management enables charges to be established 
for the use of resources in the OSIE, and for costs to be 
identified for the use of those resources. Accounting manage- 
ment includes functions to 

a) inform users of costs incurred or resources consumed; 

b) enable accounting limits to be set and tariff schedules 
to be associated with the use of resources; and 

c) enable costs to be combined where multiple resources 
are invoked to achieve a given communication objective. 

4.5.4 Configuration management 

Configuration management identifies, exercises control over, 
collects data from and provides data to open systems for the 
purpose of preparing for, initialising, starting, providing for the 
continuous operation of, and terminating interconnection 
services. Configuration management includes functions to 

a) set the parameters that control the routine operation 
of the open system; 

b) associate names with managed objects and sets of 
managed objects; 

c) initialize and close down managed objects; 

d) collect information on demand about the current 
condition of the open system; 

e) obtain announcements of significant changes in the 
condition of the open system; and 

f) change the configuration of the open system. 



4.5.5 Performance management 

Performance management enables the behaviour of resources 
in the OSIE and the effectiveness of communication activities 
to be evaluated. Performance management includes functions 



to 



a) gather statistical information; 

b) maintain and examine logs of system state histories; 

c) determine system performance under natural and 
artificial conditions; and 

d) alter system modes of operation for the purpose of 
conducting performance management activities. 



4,5.6 Security management 

The purpose of security management is to support the 
application of security policies by means of functions which 
include 

a) the creation, deletion and control of security services 
and mechanisms; 

b) the distribution of security-relevant information; and 

c) the reporting of security-relevant events. 

NOTE - tSO/iEC 7498-2 provides further information on the place- 
ment of OSi Management functions within the overall Security 
Architecture. 



5 Model for OSI Management 

5.1 Overview 

OSl Management encompass<iS those activities needed to 
control, coordinate and monitor the resources which allow 
communications to take place in the OSI Environment, 
Activities relate to the means by which 

a) a real open system obtains information to enable the 
supervision and control of its communications resources; 
and 

b) real open systems cooperate to supervise and control 
the OSI Environment. 

The model of OSI Management is defined in terms of 

c) the OSI Management structure (see 5.2); 

d) the supporting functionality required by OSI Manage- 
ment (see 5.3); 

e) the Management Information Base (see 5.4); 

f) the flow of control amongst processes (see 5.5); and 

g) the flow of information between entities (see 5.6). 

5.2 OSI Management structure 

Management is effected through a set of management 
processes. These processes are not necessarily located at 
one local system but may be distributed in many ways over 
a nljmber of systems. Where management processes which 
are not co-resident need to communicate with one another 



IS 12373 (Part 
ISO/IEC 7498 



4): 1993 
■4 : 1989 



in the OSI Environment, they communicate using OSI 
Management protocols. OSI Management is accomplished 
through 

a) systems management; 

b) (N)-layer management; and 

c) (N)-layer operation. 

Systems management provides mechanisms for the monitor- 
ing, control and coordination of managed objects through the 
use of application-layer systems management protocols. OSI 
communications concerning systems management functions 
are realized through a systems management application- 
entity (SMAE). Systems management may be used to manage 
any objects within or associated with an open system. 

(N)-layer management provides mechanisms for the monitor- 
ing, control and coordination of managed objects which relate 
to communications activities within the (N)-layer, through the 
use of special-purpose management protocols within the (N)- 
layer. {N)-iayer management can affect multiple instances of 
communication. The (N)-layer may therefore be managed 
through the use of systems management protocols or through 
the use of (N)-layer management protocols. 

(N)-layer operation provides mechanisms for the monitoring 
and control of a single instance of communication. 

This part of ISO/IEC 7498 does not imply any particular 
relationships among management mechanisms. 



5.3 Supporting functionality required by OSI Man- 
agement 

An open system must have sufficient functionality at all seven 
layers to support an SMAE before the systems management 
functionality provided by that SMAE can be accessed by 
another open system. 

When the functionality to support any SMAEs does not exist, 
the greatest OS! Management functionality that can be 
available on such an open system is the set of separate, 
individual functionalities provided by the layer managements 
of the (N)-layers within that open system. In order to support 
(N)-iayer management, sufficient communication functionality 
must exist at layers 1 to (N-1). 

When neither systems management nor (N)-layer manage- 
ment can be provided, then the greatest OSI Management 
functionality that can be available is the set of separate, 
individual management functionalities provided by (N)-layer 
operation. 

An SMAE can exist on an open system independently of the 
existence of (N)-layer management entities at any of the 
layers. 



5.4 Management Information Base 

A Management Information Base (MIB) is that information 
within an open system which may be transferred or affected 
through the use of OSI Management protocols. The MIB is 
the set of managed objects within an open system, however 
only the managed objects relating to the OSI Environment are 
subject to standardization. In addition, the logical structure of 



management information is standardized. This does not imply 
any form of physical or logical storage for the information and 
its implementation is a matter of local concern and outside 
the scope of OSI standards. 

Management information may be shared between manage- 
ment processes and structured according to the requirements 
of those processes. The MIB neither restricts the interpretation 
of management data to a pre-defined set, nor to whether the 
data is stored in a processed or unprocessed form. However 
both the abstract syntax and the semantics of information 
which is part of the MIB are defined so that they can be 
represented in OSI protocol exchanges. 



5.5 Flow of management control 

Management processes, which support OSI Management, 
receive control information 

a) from people and/or software acting as administrative 
agents local to a management process; and 

b) from remote systems through their: 

1) SMAEs 

2) (N)-layer management entities 

3) (N)-entities 

The management processes exert control 

c) directly upon managed objects in the same open 
system; and 

d) upon managed objects in other open systems by 
protocol exchanges through their: 

1) SMAEs 

2) (N)-layer management entities 

3) (N)-entit(es 

The fiow of control from administrative agents to local 
management processes occurs entirely within the Local 
System Environment, and as such is outside the scope of OSI 
Management standardization. Such local control may result 
in OSI Management communications. The abstract syntax 
and semantics of control flow within the OSI Environment are 
defined so that they can be represented in OSI protocol 
exchanges. 



5.6 Flow of management information 

The OSI Management information within a Management 
Information Base may be provided by, and made available to 

a) local administrative agents; and 

b) remote open systems, through: 

1) systems management protocols 

2) (N)-tayer management protocols 

3) (N)-protocols 

Information exchanges may provide monitoring information or 
may result in the exercise of control. Information exchanges 
between administrative agents and the MIB occur entirely 
within the local system and are outside the scope of OSI 
Management standardization. 



IS 12373 ( Part 4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



6 OSi Management specifics 

6.1 OSI Management standardization 

Areas of OSI Management standardization include 

a) the services and protocols used to transfer manage- 
ment information between open systems; and 

b) the abstract syntax and semantics of the information 
transferred in management protocols. 

These areas of standardization apply to systems manage- 
ment, (N)-layer management and normal (N)-layer operation. 

The actual specification of the syntax, semantics, services and 
protocols, and the concepts applicable to managed objects 
are provided in specific OSI standards. The physical represen- 
tation of managed objects and their physical storage are local 
matters and are not subject to standardization. 

Systems management standards specify the systems manage- 
ment services and protocols, plus the abstract syntax and 
semantics of the information transferred in such protocols. 

The (N)-layer management protocols and the management 
aspects of (N)-prot6cols are defined by International Stan- 
dards specifying those protocols in oi'der to cover layer 
related aspects of the above management facilities. (N)-layer 
standards may specify (N)-tayer management protocols and 
their use. 

This standard does not imply that any systems management 
protocols or layer management protocols are mandatory, 
neither does it constrain the use of management information 
in any (N)-protocol exchanges. 



6.2 OSI Management operation 

6.2.1 Systems management 

Systems management communications provide the normal 
method for exchanging OSI management information. These 
communications take place between Systems Management 
applications-entities. Systems Management protocols are 
application layer protocols. Any application-process which 
communicates according to Systems Management protocol 
standards does so through an SMAE. The service elements 
used to support Systems Management are Application Service 
Elements. 

Not all open systems provide the full functionality of the seven 
layers specified in ISO/IEC 7498. Where such open systems 
are not the initial source of, nor the ultimate destination for the 
transfer of data, they act for such instances of communication 
as relay open systems. Where such systems are required to 
act as sources of system management information or are 
subject to systems management control, information is 
communicated using systems management protocols. 



6.2.2 (N)-layer management 

(N)-!ayer management supports the monitoring, control and 
coordination of (N)-layer managed objects. (N)-layer manage- 
ment protocols are supported by protocols of the layers {N-1) 
and below. They do not provide communication capability 



offered by the (N + 1) and higher layers. (N)-layer management 
protocols can only convey management information between 
peer (N)-layer management entities pertinent to the (N)-sub- 
systems in which these entitles reside. 

(N)-iayer management protocols should only be used where 
special requirements dictate that systems management 
protocols are inappropriate or when systems management 
protocols are not available. ^ 

{N)-layer management protocols provide such functions as 

a) communicating parameter values associated with 
managed objects which relate to the operation of the 
(N)-layer; 

b) testing the functionality provided by the (N-1)-layer;and 

c) conveying error information describing faults or 
diagnostic Information related to the operation of the (N)- 
layer. 

Each (N)-layer management protocol is independent of other 
layer management protocols. This part of ISO/IEC 7498 does 
not require the development of (N)-layer management 
protocols for each of the seven layers. 



6.2.3 (N)-layer operation 

Management functions may exist within the (N)-prdtocols in 
all seven layers of OSI. The management information that is 
carried within an (N)-protocol must be distinguishable from 
information which the protocol carries for other purposes. It 
is the responsibility of the (N)-protocol to provide this distinc- 
tion. 

Management information carried by (N)-protocol exists for the 
purpose of controlling and monitoring a single instance of 
communication. Examples of management information carried 
within an (N)-protocol are 

a) parameters carried in connection establishment PDUs 
that apply to the specific instance of communication which 
is being established; 

b) parameters carried in particular PDUs which can 
modify the environment in which this instance of com- 
munication operates; 

c) error information describing faults encountered during 
the operation of that specific instance of communication; 
and 

d) parameters carried in connection release PDUs which 
report information pertaining to that specific instance of 
communication which is being released. 



6.2.4 Relationships between systems management, (N)- 
layer management and (N)-layer operation 

Whereas the specification of (N)-layer management and 
(N)-layer operation standards is not the concern of systems 
management, the semantics of (N)-layer management 
.information and the operations permitted thereon must be 
consistent with such information and operations defined by 
systems management. 



IS 12373 ( Part 4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



(N)-layer management entities are of different types from 
those (N)-entities which operate (N)-protocols as defined in 
ISO/IEC 7498. (N)-layer management protocols are distin- 
guished from normal (N)-protocols by the use of (N-l)-layer 
addressing mechanisms or by discrimination mechanisms 
within the (N)-layer. 

(N)-layer management entities and (N)-entities operate, 
independently of each other, upon managed objects which 
relate to the operation of the (N)-layer. 



normal (N)-sen/ices, or services provided specifically for 
management purposes. The information exchanges may be 
either 2-pafty or N-party in nature, depending upon the 
requirements of the Jnrtiator of the exchange and the nature 
of the sen/ices available to carry out the exchange. 

Any party may take the role of initiator In a management 
exchange; the remaining parties to the exchange take the role 
of responder. The exchange may be initiated for the purposes 
of performing management operations or notifications. 



6.3 The form of management information ex- 
changes 

Management information exchanges are effected by the use 
of Application Layer or (N)-layer services; these may be 



6.4 OSI Management conformance 

This part of ISO/IEC 7498 does not imply any conformance 
requirements for systems management, (N)-layer management 
or (N)-layer operation. 



IS 12373 (Part 4): 1993 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



ANNEX A 

(informative) 

COMMENTS RELATING TO THE OSI MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK 

A.1 Introduction 

The OSI Management Framework provides the concepts and an abstract model of OSI Management for use by those developing 
OSI Standards. 

The purpose of this Annex is to provide additional explanatory material as an aid to understanding the concepts in the body of 
this part of ISO/IEC 7498 and to explain their application. 

A.2 Abbreviations 

QoS Quality of Service 

A.3 Brief Overview of OSI Management Scope and Concepts 

Three forms of management information exchange are defined within the OSI Management architecture for which standards are 
expected 

a) systems management; 

b) {N)-layer management; and 

c) (N)-layer operation. 

Systems management is the preferred form of management information exchange and provides mechanisms for the exchange 
of information relating to the monitoring, control and coordination of communications resources of concern to open systems. The 
Framework uses the term managed objects to describe the management view of these resources. Systems management acts 
upon managed objects in order to manage the resources to which these objects relate. Such managed objects can relate to one 
or more OSI layers. 



5 
4 
3 
2 

1 





Systems Management 
Protocols 




Application 


Application 


"MrM^Tnal P**^Tmmii"n T /-'ia'h T rM^c 


Presentation 


Presentation 


Session 


Session 


Transport 


Transport 


Network 


Network 


Data Link 


Data Link 


Physical 


Physical 



5 
4 
3 
2 
1 



Protocols 
Figure A.1 - Systems Management Information Exchange 

It is perceived that the majority of management information exchanges between open systems will require context negotiation, the 
establishment of a management session, a reliable end-to-end transport service etc., in exactly the same way as other application 
layer exchanges. Therefore systems management communication is effected through application layer protocols (see figure A.1). 
Note that the Framework does not exclude the use of connectionless services. 



Systems management services and protocols are being developed by the OSI Management Working Group in ISO. 



IS 12373 (Part 4): 1993 
ISP/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



fN)-laver management is used in special circumstances to carry information relating specifically to the operation of an (N)-layer. 
An example of layer management is the transport layer network connection nfianagement subprotocol (NCMS). It is important 
to note that layer management at one layer should not replicate any of the functionality of the layers above it, as this would be at 
variance With the Basic Reference fVlodel. Figure A.2 shows an example of such an exchange in the transport layer. (N)-iayer 
management exchanges can occur in any layer, although layers 2, 3 and 4 are those where such standards are most likely to 
occur. ' 

Layer management standards are the responsibility of the relevant layer standards group, within ISO. 



7 


Application 


6 


Presentation 


5 


Session 


4 


Transport 


3 


Network 


2 


Data Link 


1 


Physical 



Special Purpose Layer 



Normal Communications 
Protocols 



Application 


7 


Presentation 


6 


Session 


5 


Transport 


4 


Network 


3 


Data Link 


2 


Physical 


1 



Figure A.2 - (N)-Layer Management Exchange 

(N)-layer operation is the set of facilities which control and manage a single instance of communication. These facilities can be 
embedded within an existing 'normal' (N)-protocol exchange (see figure A.3), for example the passing of charging information in 
an X.25 Clear packet, or they may be a special element of protocol, such as an X.25 Reset. 

Standards for (N)-layer operation are the responsibility of the relevant layer standards group, within ISO. 



7 


Application 


6 


Presentation 


5 


Session 


4 


Transport 


3 


Network 


2 


Data Link 


1 


Physical 



Management Information 
carried in Normal 
Comms. Protocols 



Normal Communications 
Protocols 



Application 


7 


Presentation 


6 


Session 


5 


Transport 


4 


Network 


3 


Data Link 


2 


Physical 


1 



Figure A.3 - (N)-Layer Operation 



A.4 Systems Management Standards * 

There are requirements for standardized application services and protocols for the exchange of management information covering 
a number of functions. A set of application layer standards for systems management are being developed to give users a 'toolkit' 
of sen/Ices and protocols to allow the exchange of management information between open systems. 

8 



IS 12373 ( Part 4): 1^3 
ISO/IEC 7498-4 : 1989 



A.5 Management Information and the Management Information Base 

It is important to recognize that the real information being carried in OSI management protocols is in fact information generated 
by (and defined by) the individual layer standards. Thus the specification and identification of these 'real' elements of management 
information needs to be carried out by the layer standards groups, in liaison with the OSI Management working group, as part of 
their standardization activity. 

A common approach is needed across the layers if a consistent definition is to be produced without omissions or duplications. 
There is also the problem that not alt elements are layer-related. Furthermore, the top-level statements of allocation of functions 
to the set of OSI Management protocols are not complete. This makes it hard for those who have identified particular user needs 
for management activities (e.g. for access control or QoS) to express them constructively and to direct contributions to the 
appropriate groups. 

Consequently, the MIB can be viewed as that information within an open system which can be transferred or affected by the use 
of OSI Management protocols. 

The MIB can also be visualized as the set of managed objects within an open system, which relate to the OSI Environment. In 
addition, the logical structure of management information must be standardized, however this does not imply any form of physical 
or logical storage for the information and its implementation is a matter of local concern and outside the scope of OSI standards. 

Management information may be shared between management processes and structured according to the requirements of those 
processes. The MIB neither restricts the interpretation of management data to a pre-defined set, nor to whether the data is stored 
as received or processed. However both the abstract syntax and the semantics of information which is part of the MIB are defined 
so that they can be represented in OSI protocol exchanges. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters^in /he country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. E-nquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
{ Publications K BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also revitA'ed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook ■ and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No LTD 36 ( 1554 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

^/[op^oi. Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg C331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 )331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. i. T. Scheme VII M, V, 1, P. Road. Maniktola 07 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 Ol 86 26. 37 86 62 

53 38 43, 53 16 40 



Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 \ 



53 23 84 



Southern : C. L T. Campus. IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



C235 02 16, 235 04 42 



►235 15 19, 235 23 15 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MiDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 1632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



