**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 13082-3 (1991) : Bulk handling equipment - Ship unloader 
- Gantry mounted grab type - Code of practice for design, 
manufacture and erection, Part 3 Information to be supplied 
by purchaser and the manufacturer [MED 7 : Material Handling 
Systems and Equipment] 



a^v j i juas^N^fea rafrg amsBs 



£«> \\ i %^s^^^>^i^: 



^^CVVVfa^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13082 ( Part 3) : 1991 

(Reaffirmed 2001) 

TTftf *ft"T*FT ^T^T-^^Tt *hTTfSRT Ufa 

ww* ^t ftfr *%rr 

*TT 3 W 3TT7 fwfcTT 5TTT *t *TT% *I*ft StRT 

Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 

SHIP UNLOADER — GANTRY MOUNTED 

GRAB TYPE — CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DESIGN, MANUFACTURE AND ERECTION 

PART 3 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PURCHASER 
AND THE MANUFACTURER 



UDC 621-869-2 : 629 12 : 00676 



© BIS 199 i 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1991 Price Group 2 



Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 07 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Pert 3 ) was adopted by the Buieau of Indian Standards, after the diaft 
finalized by the Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy 
Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

There are various types of ship unloaders but main types being continuous and grab type. These 
could be mounted on the gantry or crawler/tyres. 

Ship unloaders are important functional subsystem of unloading and transportation of bulk 
iriaterials shiped. 

This Part 3 is the one in the series of other paits of this standard covering the code of practice 
for design, manufacture and erection of gantry type ship unloadcr provided with horizontal boom 
and grab-bucket. Other parts of this standard are: 

IS 13082 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 Mechanical and structural requirements 
IS 13082 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 Electro-mechanical requirements 

The requirements given in this standard are for guidelines and notwithstanding the requirements 
to be fulfilled by the purchasers and the manufacturers in accordance with Statutory Acts, Rules, 
Regulations or otherwise specified by other Authorities. 

This standard is expected to provide uniform practice to be adopted by the purchasers and the 
manufacturers of such shin unloaders. 

For structural requirements of ship unloaders a reference may be made to IS 13148 - 1991 : 1991 
Bulk handling equipment — Mobile continuous type — Rules for design of structure. 



IS 13082 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 

Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 
SHIP UNLOADER - GANTRY MOUNTED 
GRAB TYPE — CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
DESIGN, MANUFACTURE AND ERECTION 

PART 3 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PURCHASER 
AND THE MANUFACTURER 



1 SCOPE 

1,1 This standard ( Part 3) covers the require= 
merits of information to be supplied by the 
purchaser and the manufacturer relating to the 
design, manufacture and erection of gantry 
mounted grab type ship unloader provided with 
horizontal boom and grab-bucket. 

2 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY 
THE PURCHASER 

2.1 All the necessary information regarding the 
conditions under which the unloader is to be 
used, together with the particulars laid down in 
Annex A shall be supplied by the purchaser 
with the enquiry or order* 

3 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY 
THE MANUFACTURER 

3.1 The manufacturer shall supply with the 
tender, information regarding the construction 
of the unloader in accordance with Annex B. 

4 IDENTIFICATION AND LOAD 
INDICATION 

4-1 Both sides of the unloader shall bear one or 



more plaques on which the following shall be 
inscribed: 

1) Manufacturer's name, 

2) Manufacturer's serial number, 

3) Year of manufacture, and 

4) The safe working load of the grab-bucket 
including the weight of grab-bucket and 
also of the hoist and their maximum 
distances from the centre line of the long 
travel tracks. 

4.1.1 A plaque shall be located in full view of 
the operator preferably inside the operator's 
cabin, bearing the safe working load(s) the 
maximum radius of operation, the various 
speeds, etc. 

4.1.2 An alarm shall be fitted to the unloader 
to give the driver audible and visual warning 
when the load exceeds the safe working load, 
and a device preferably electrical shall be fitted 
which shall automatically stop the hoisting 
motion when the load exceeds the safe working 
load, which shall not preclude the load from 
being lowered. 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 2.1 ) 

INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE PURCHASER 



A-l The following information in regard to the 
details of the unloader shall be furnished by the 
purchaser at the time of enquiry and/or order. 



A-l.l General 

1) Number of unloaders required 

2) Type of unloader 

3) Duty or class of unloader: 

a) Trolley travel 



b) Grab hoisting/lowering 

c) Grab closing/opening 

d) Boom luffing. 

e) Unloader long travel _ 



4) Safe working load in kN 

5) Unloading capacity tonnes ( kN ) per 
hour: 

a) Free digging rate 

b) Average rate 

6) Bulk carrier: 

a) Type . 



b) Capacity/ size 

c) Major dimensions: 
i) Length _. _ 

ii) Beam ( width ) 

iii) Depth below deck level. 



IS 13082 (Part 3): 1991 



iv) Hatch opening sizes 
v) Number of hatches_ 



vi) Height of deck above water level 
when fully loaded 

vii) Height of deck above water level 
when empty 



c) Maximum rainfall per annum_ 

d) Average rainfall per annum 

e) Maximum relative humidity 

f) Minimum relative humidity 

g) Seismic coefficient 



viii) Variations in water levels 
7) Operation 



8) Bucket lift above travelling rail level 

9) Bucket drop below travelling rail level 

10) Maximum height of structure permissible 
including lights for aviation 



11) Maximum trolley travel from the centre 
line of long travel rails on the ship side — 

12) Approximate tower travel along quay. 

13) Travelling rail gauge 

14) Location __ 

15) Maximum wheel load permissible _ 



h) Maximum wind pressure.. 
A-1.2 Type of Control 
A-1.3 Electrical Details 

1) Power supply, A/C or D/C: 
a) A/C supply 
Volts 



Frequency _ 

b) D/C supply 
Volts 



Number of phases_. 
Number of wires 



Number ofxvires_ 



Is one pole earthed, 
2) Controls 



_Yes/No 



16) Characteristics of materials to be handled: 

a) Bulk density 

b) Moisture content by weight 

c) Hardness on Moh's scale 

d) Angle of repose 

e) Sieve analysis 



A-L4 Operator's Cabin 

1) Type and location: 

a) Type of cabin (fixed or moving )_ 

b) Location on bridge, if fixed 



f) Abrasiveness, corrosiveness, etc_ 

17) Climatic conditions: 

a) Maximum temperature 



NOTE — Unless otherwise stated, 
cabin shall generally be moving. 

2) Open or closed type 



the operator's 



b) Minimum temperature. 



A-1.5 


Any Site Restrictions 






A-1.6 


Any Special Requirements 







ANNEX B 
( Clause 3.1) 

INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE MANUFACTURER 



B-l The following details in regard to the 
unloader shall be supplied by the manufacturer 
to the purchaser at the time of enquiry and/or 
order. Capital letters in parenthesis refer to 
those in Fig. 1. 

1) Type of unloader _ 



2) Duty or class of unloader : 
a) Trolly travel 



b) Grab hoi&ting/lowering^. 

c) Grab closing/opening 

d) Boom luffing 

e) Unloader long travel 



3) Safe working load in kN _.._ 

4) Unloading capacity in tonnes ( kN ) per 
hour: 



a) Free digging rate in tonnes ( kN ) per 
hour 

b) Average rate in tonnes ( kN ) per 
hour . 

5) Operation _____ 

6) Bucket lift above travelling rail level 
( B+F ) 

7) Bucket drop below travelling rail level 
( E-F ) 

8) Maximum height of structure including 
light for aviation „_ __,_ __. 

9) Maximum trolly travel from the central 
line of long travel rail on the ship side 
{A)_ _ 

10) Approximate travel along quay ____ 

11) Travelling rail gauge ( / ) 



12) Location 

13) Operating cycle time in seconds, 

14) Maximum wheel load ( actual )_ 



15) Unloader performance operating speeds 
( loaded ) in metre per minute: 



a) Grab hoisting 

b) Grab lowering^ 

c) Grab closing 

d) Grab opening 

e) Trolly travel 

f) Unloader travel. 



IS 13082 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 



g) Cabin travel _ 
h) Boom luffing. 



16) Operator's cabin: 

1) Type and location: 

a) Type of cabin ( fixed or moving ) 

b) Location on bridge, if fixed 

2) Open or closed 

17) Track rails: 

a) Size and weight per unit length 

b) Width of head 




mm, mm, 

ARRANGEMENT OF LONG TRAVEL WHEELS 

C Distance between ship side and deck opening end 

D Width of ship 

G Distance between high water level and traveling rail level 

H Distance between mean sea level and travelling rail level 

K Distance between centre line of rear ( from ship side ) long travel rail and centre of belt conveyor 

L Distance between low water level and travelling rail level 



Fig. 1 General Arrangement of Ship Unloader with Ship 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference ; 

Doc: No. HMD 07 (5228) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New^Delhf 1 10002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.LP- Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC f Marol, Andhcri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

f 331 01 31 
1 331 13 73 

37 86 62 
53 38 43 

2350216 



6 32 92 95 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM- 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India 



