**************** 


*■  *Z**K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 
Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


mr^sssss^^w: 


,_A» 


**************** 


BLANK  PAGE 


<_<ii££ 


UJ> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14869  :  2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 

(  Reaffirmed  2004 ) 


mvcfkr  www? 

3FTTc[?T  ^M  3  ^cr  MT?  HT^R  —  3]|±ldlcbK  >HHei4l 

3Jk  U-3TTc^R  eft 

/nc//a/7  Standard 

LIQUID  FLOW  MEASUREMENT  IN  OPEN 

CHANNELS  —  RECTANGULAR,  TRAPEZOIDAL 

AND  U-SHAPED  FLUMES 


ICS  17.120.20 


©  BIS  2000 

BUREAU       OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI   110002 

October  2000  Price  Group  14 


Fluid  Flow  Measurement  Sectional  Committee,  WRD  01 


NATIONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO  4359:1983  'Liquid  flow  measurement  in  open  channels 
—  Rectangular,  trapezoidal  and  U-shaped  flumes'  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for 
Standardization  (ISO)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the  recommendations  of  the 
Fluid  Flow  Measurement  Sectional  Committee  (WRD  01 )  and  approval  of  the  Water  Resources  Division 
Council.  In  the  adopted  standard,  certain  conventions  are,  however  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian 
Standards.  Attention  is  especially  drawn  to  the  following: 

a)  Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be 
read  as  'Indian  Standard'. 

b)  Comma  (,)  has  been  used  as  a  decimal  marker  while  in  Indian  Standards,  the  current  practice 
is  to  use  a  point  (.)  as  the  decimal  marker. 

Technical  Corrigendum  1  to  the  above  International  Standard  has  been  incorporated. 

CROSS  REFERENCES 

In  this  adopted  standard,  the  following  International  Standards  have  been  referred  to.  Read  in  their 
respective  places,  the  following  Indian  Standards: 


International  Standard 


ISO  748  Liquid  flow  measure- 
ment in  open  channels  — 
Velocity-area  methods 


ISO  772  Liquid  flow  measure- 
ment in  open  channels  — 
Vocabulary  and  symbols 


ISO  1438  Liquid  flow  measure- 
ment in  open  channels  using 
thin-plate  weirs  and  venturi 
flumes 


Corresponding  Indian  Standard 


IS  1192:1981  Velocity  area 
methods  for  measurement  of 
flow  of  water  in  open  channels 
{first  revision) 


IS  1191:1971  Glossary  of  terms 
and  symbols  used  in  connection 
with  the  measurement  of  liquid 
flow  with  a  free  surface  (first 
revision) 

IS  9108:1979  Liquid  flow  mea- 
surement in  open  channels 
using  thin  plate  weirs 


Degree  of 
Equivalence 

Identical  with  elucidation  in 
Indian  Standard  (IS  1192:1981 
is  under  revision  based  on  ISO 
748:1997  'Measurement  of 
liquid  flow  in  open  channels  — 
Velocity-area  methods) 

Technically  equivalent  (IS  1 191: 
1971  is  under  revision  based  on 
ISO  772:1996  'Hydrometric  de- 
terminations —  Vocabulary  and 
symbols') 

Technically  equivalent  to  ISO 
1438-1:1980  ^  Water  flow  mea- 
surement in  open  channels 
using  weirs  and  venturi  flumes: 
Part  1  Thin  plate  weirs 


REFERENCES  TO  ERRORS  AND  CLARIFICATIONS  IN  TEXT 

The  Technical  Committee  while  adopting  the  text  of  this  International  Standard  identified  certain  textual 
errors  to  the  following  clauses  and  felt  necessary  to  correct  these  in  the  Indian  context: 

Clause  Corrections 

Reference 

9.4.1  Replace  'total  head'  by  'effective  total  head'  in  the  first  sentence. 

1 0.1 ,5  Replace  'pont'  by  'point'  in  the  last  line. 

10.4.1  Line  before  equation  (24)  may  be  changed  as  'Substitute  (22)  and  (23)  into  (21)'. 

10.6.1  Replace  'of '  by  'is'  in  the  last  sentence. 

1 1 .7.5(c)  Replace  'wherever  the  water  surface  lies'  by  'at  all  water  levels'  in  the  last  line. 

D-4.8  Replace  by  'Compute  discharge  for  the  given  head  from  equation  (44)'. 

Fig.  2  Read  the  title  as  'Geometry  of  Rectangular  Throated  Flume'. 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359 :  1983 


Contents 


Page 


1  Scope  and  field  of  application 

2  References 

3  Definitions  and  symbols 

4  Units  of  measurement 

5  Selection  of  the  type  of  flume 

6  Installation 2 

6.1  Selection  of  site 2 

6.2  Installation  conditions 2 

6.3  Flume  structure 3 

6.4  Downstream  conditions 3 

7  Maintenance  —  General  requirements 3 

8  Measurement  of  head 3 

8.1  General  requirements 3 

8.2  Gauge  well 4 

8.3  Zero  setting 4 

9  Determination  of  discharge 4 

9.1  General  equations  for  discharge  4 

9.2  Calculation  of  discharge  from  observed  head 5 

9.3  Calculation  of  stage-discharge  relationships 5 

9.4  Approach  velocity 6 

10    Rectangular  throated  flume 6 

10.1  Description 6 

10.2  Location  of  head  measurement  section 7 

10.3  Provision  for  modular  flow 7 

10.4  Evaluation  of  discharge 7 

10.5  Computation  of  stage-discharge  relationship 8 

10.6  Limits  of  application  8 

10.7  Uncertainty  of  measurement 8 


(i) 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


11  Trapezoidal  throated  flumes 8 

11.1  Description 8 

11.2  Location  of  head  measurement  section  9 

11.3  Provision  for  modular  flow 9 

11.4  Evaluation  of  discharge 9 

11.5  Computation  of  stage-discharge  relationship  10 

11.6  Graphical  approach  to  design 11 

11.7  Limits  of  application  11 

11.8  Uncertainty  of  measurement 12 

12  U-throated  <round-bottomed)  flumes 12 

12.1  Description 12 

12.2  Location  of  head  measurement  section  12 

12.3  Provision  for  modular  flow 12 

12.4  Evaluation  of  discharge 13 

12.5  Computation  of  stage-discharge  relationship  14 

12.6  Limits  of  application  15 

12.7  Uncertainty  of  measurement 15 

13  Errors  in  flow  measurement 15 

13.1  General 15 

13.2  Sources  of  error 15 

13.3  Kinds  of  error 16 

13.4  Errors  in  coefficient  values 16 

13.5  Errors  in  measurement 16 

13.6  Combination  of  uncertainties  to  give  overall  uncertainty  on  discharge  17 

Annexes 

A    Guide  for  the  selection  of  weirs  and  flumes  for  the  measurement 

of  the  discharge  of  water  in  open  channels  18 

B     Symbols  and  units 20 

C    Velocity  distribution 22 

D    Computation  of  discharge  using  boundary  layer  theory 23 

E     Examples  illustrating  methods  for  the  computation  of  discharge 26 

F     Example  of  the  computation  of  the  overall  uncertainty  of  discharge 

measurement 30 

G     Determination  of  height  of  hump  -  Rectangular  throated  flumes 31 

(«) 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


Indian  Standard 

LIQUID  FLOW  MEASUREMENT  IN  OPEN 

CHANNELS  —  RECTANGULAR,  TRAPEZOIDAL 

AND  U-SHAPED  FLUMES 


1     Scope  and  field  of  application 

This  International  Standard  deals  with  the  measurement  of 
flow  in  rivers  and  artificial  channels  under  steady  or  slowly  vary- 
ing flow  conditions,  using  certain  types  of  standing-wave  <or 
critical  depth)  flumes.  A  wide  variety  of  flumes  has  been 
designed  but  only  those  which  have  received  general  accep- 
tance after  adequate  research  and  field  testing,  and  which 
therefore  do  not  require  in-situ  calibration  are  considered. 
Three  types  of  flumes,  covering  a  wide  range  of  applications 
are  recommended  as  follows  : 

a)  Rectangular-throated  (see  figure  1). 

b)  Trapezoidal-throated  (see  figure  4). 

c)  U-throated,  i.e.  round-bottomed  (see  figure  5). 

The  flow  conditions  considered  are  uniquely  dependent  on  the 
upstream  head,  i.e.  subcritical  flow  must  exist  upstream  of  the 
flume,  after  which  the  flow  accelerates  through  the  contraction 
and  passes  through  its  critical  depth,  and  the  water  level 
beyond  the  structure  is  low  enough  to  have  no  influence  upon 
its  performance. 

Annex  A  gives  the  guidelines  for  the  selection  of  weirs  and 
flumes  for  the  measurement  of  the  discharge  of  water  in  open 
channels. 


2     References 

ISO  748,    Liquid    flow   measurement   in    open    channels  — 
Velocity-area  methods. 

ISO  772,    Liquid   flow   measurement   in    open    channels  — 
Vocabulary  and  symbols. 

ISO  1438,  Liquid  flow  measurement  in  open  channels  using 
thin-plate  weirs  and  venturi  flumes. 


3     Definitions  and  symbols 

For  the  purpose  of  this  International  Standard,  the  definitions 
given  in  ISO  772  apply.  A  full  list  of  symbols  with  the  cor- 
responding units  of  measurement,  is  given  in  annex  B. 


4    Units  of  measurement 

The  units  of  measurement  used  in  this  International  Standard 
are  SI  units. 


5    Selection  of  the  type  of  flume 

5.1  The  type  of  flume  that  should  be  used  depends  upon 
several  factors,  such  as  the  range  of  discharge  to  be  measured, 
the  accuracy  required,  the  head  available  and  whether  or  not 
the  flow  carries  sediment. 

5.2  The  rectangular-throated  flume  is  simpler  to  construct. 
To  achieve  proportionality,  i.e.  to  avoid  either  ponding  or  draw- 
down in  the  approach  channel  when  the  discharge  is  variable, 
provision  of  a  hump  in  the  bed  becomes  necessary  with 
discharges  bigger  or  smaller  than  the  design  discharge  (see 
figure  2). 

5.3  The  trapezoidal-throated  flume  is  more  appropriate 
where  a  wide  range  of  discharge  is  to  be  measured  with  consis- 
tent accuracy.  This  shape  of  throat  is  particularly  suitable 
where  it  is  necessary  to  work  to  a  given  stage-discharge 
relationship. 

5.4  The  U-throated  flume  is  useful  for  installation  in  a 
U-shaped  channel  or  where  discharge  is  from  a  circular-section 
conduit.  It  has  found  particular  application  in  sewers  and  at 
sewage  works. 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


6     Installation 


6.2     Installation  conditions 


6.1     Selection  of  site 


6.2.1     General  requirements 


6.1.1     The  flume  shall  be  located  in  a  straight  section  of  chan- 
nel, avoiding  local  obstructions,  roughness  or  unevenness  of 

the  bed. 


6.1.2  A  preliminary  study  shall  be  made  of  the  physical  and 
hydraulic  features  of  the  proposed  site,  to  check  that  it 
conforms  lor  can  be  constructed  or  modified  so  as  to  conform) 
to  the  requirements  necessary  for  measurement  of  discharge  by 
a  flume.  Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  following 
features  in  selecting  the  site  : 

a)  The  adequacy  of  the  Length  of  channel  of  regular  cross- 
section  available. 

b)  The  uniformity  of  the  existing  velocity  distribution  (see 
annex  C). 

c)  The  avoidance  of  a  steep  channel  (but  see  6.2.2). 

d)  The  effects  of  any  increased  upstream  water  levels  due 
to  the  measuring  structure. 

e)  The  conditions  downstream  (including  such  influences 
as  tides,  confluences  with  other  streams,  sluice  gates,  mill 
dams  and  other  controlling  features,  including  seasonal 
weed  growth,  which  might  cause  drowning). 

f)  The  impermeability  of  the  ground  on  which  the  struc- 
ture is  to  be  founded  and  the  necessity  for  piling,  grouting 
or  other  means  of  controlling  seepage. 

g)  The  necessity  for  flood  banks,  to  confine  the  maximum 
discharge  to  the  channel. 

h)  The  stability  of  the  banks,  and  the  necessity  for  trimm- 
ing and/or  revetment. 


6.2.1.1  The  complete  measuring  installation  shall  consist  of 
an  approach  channel,  a  flume  structure  and  a  downstream 
channel.  The  condition  of  each  of  these  three  components 
affects  the  overall  accuracy  of  the  measurements.  Installation 
requirements  include  such  features  as  the  surface  finish  of  the 
flume,  the  cross-sectional  shape  of  the  channel,  channel 
roughness  and  the  influence  of  control  devices  upstream  or 
downstream  of  the  gauging  structure. 


6.2. 1 .2  The  distribution  and  direction  of  velocity  may  have  an 
important  influence  on  the  performance  of  a  flume  (see  6.2.2 
and^annex  C). 


6.2.1.3  Once  a  flume  has  been  installed,  any  changes  in  the 
system  which  affect  the  basis  of  the  design  will  change  the 
discharge  characteristics. 


6.2.2    Approach  channel 


6.2.2.1  If  the  flow  in  the  approach  channel  is  disturbed  by 
irregularities  in  the  boundary,  for  example  large  boulders  or 
rock  outcrops,  or  by  a  bend,  sluice  gate  or  other  feature  which 
causes  asymmetry  of  discharge  across  the  channel,  the  ac- 
curacy of  gauging  may  be  affected.  The  flow  in  the  approach 
channel  should  have  a  symmetrical  velocity  distribution  (see 
annex  C)  and  this  can  most  readily  be  achieved  by  providing  a 
long  straight  approach  channel  of  uniform  cross-section. 


6.2.2.2  A  length  of  approach  channel  five  times  the  water- 
surface  width  at  maximum  flow  will  usually  suffice,  provided 
flow  does  not  enter  the  approach  channel  with  high  velocity  via 
a  sharp  bend  or  angled  sluice  gate.  However,  a  greater  length 
of  uniform  approach  channel  is  desirable  if  it  can  be  readily  pro- 
vided. 


j)     Uniformity  of  the  section  of  the  approach  channel. 

k)  Effect  of  wind,  which  can  have  a  considerable  effect  on 
the  flow  over  a  river,  weir  or  flume,  especially  when  these 
are  wide  and  the  head  is  small  and  when  the  prevailing  wind 
is  in  a  transverse  direction. 

m)     Aquatic  weed  growth. 

n)     Sediment  transportation. 


6. 1 .3  If  the  site  does  not  possess  the  characteristics  necessary 
for  satisfactory  measurements,  or  if  an  inspection  of  the  stream 
shows  that  the  velocity  distribution  in  the  approach  channel 
deviates  appreciably  from  the  examples  shown  in  annex  C,  the 
site  should  not  be  used  unless  suitable  improvements  are  prac- 
ticable. Alternatively,  the  performance  of  the  installation 
should  be  checked  by  independent  flow  measurement. 


6.2.2.3  The  length  of  uniform  approach  channel  suggested 
in  6.2.2.2  refers  to  the  distance  upstream  of  the  head  measur- 
ing position.  However,  in  a  natural  channel  it  would  be 
uneconomic  to  line  the  bed  and  banks  with  concrete  for  this 
distance,  and  it  would  be  necessary  to  provide  a  contraction  in 
plan  if  the  width  of  the  lined  approach  to  the  flume  throat  is  less 
than  the  width  of  the  natural  channel.  The  unlined  channel 
upstream  of  the  contraction  shall  nevertheless  comply  with  the 
requirements  of  6.2.2.1  and  6.2.2.2. 

6.2.2.4  Wing  walls  to  effect  a  contraction  in  plan  shall  be 
symmetrically  disposed  with  respect  to  the  centre  line  of  the 
channel  and  should  preferably  be  curved  with  a  radius  not  less 
than  2//max.  The  downstream  tangent  point  shall  be  at  least 
W  upstream  of  the  head  measurement  section,  and  the  lined 
section  of  approach  channel  from  the  end  of  the  curved  wing 
walls  to  the  entrance  transition  of  the  flume  shall  be  of 
prismatic  section. 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO   4359:  1983 


6.2.2.5  In  a  channel  where  the  flow  is  free  from  floating  and 
suspended  debris,  good  approach  conditions  can  also  be  pro- 
vided by  suitably  placed  baffles  formed  of  vertical  laths,  but  no 
baffle  should  be  nearer  to  the  point  at  which  head  is  measured 

6.2.2.6  Under  certain  conditions  a  hydraulic  jump  may  occur 
upstream  of  the  measuring  structure,  for  example  if  the 
approach  channel  is  steep.  Provided  the  hydraulic  jump  is  at  a 
distance  jupstream  of  not  less  than  about  30//max,  flow 
measurement  will  be  feasible,  subject  to  confirmation  that  an 
even  velocity  distribution  exists  at  the  gauging  section. 

6.2.2.7  Conditions  in  the  approach  channel  can  be  verified  by 
inspection  or  measurement  for  which  several  methods  are 
available  such  as  floats,  velocity  rods,  or  concentrations  of  dye, 
the  last  being  useful  in  checking  conditions  at  the  bottom  of  the 
channel.  A  complete  and  quantitative  assessment  of 
velocity  distribution  may  be  made  by  means  of  a  current  meter. 
The  velocity  distribution  should  then  be  assessed  by  reference 
to  annex  C. 

6.3     Flume  structure 

6.3.1  The  structure  shall  be  rigid  and  watertight  and  capable 
of  withstanding  flood  flow  conditions  without  damage  from 
outflanking  or  from  downstream  erosion.  The  axis  shall  be  in 
line  with  the  direction  of  flow  of  the  upstream  channel,  and  the 
gebmetry  shall  conform  to  the  dimensions  given  in  the  relevant 
clauses. 

6.3.2  The  surfaces  of  the  flume  throat  and  the  immediate  ap- 
proach channel  shall  be  smooth  :  they  can  be  constructed  in 
concrete  with  a  smooth  cement  finish  or  surfaced  with  a 
smooth  non-corrodible  material.  In  laboratory  installations,  the 
finish  shall  be  equivalent  to  rolled  sheet  metal  or  planed, 
sanded  and  painted  timber.  The  surface  finish  is  of  particular 
importance  within  the  prismatic  part  of  the  throat  but  can  be 
relaxed  a  distance  along  the  profile  0,5//max  upstream  and 
downstream  of  the  throat  proper. 

6.3.3  In  order  to  minimise  uncertainty  in  the  discharge,  the 
following  tolerances  are  acceptable  : 

a)  On  the  bottom  width  of  the  throat,  0,2  %  of  this  width 
with  an  absolute  maximum  of  0,01  m. 

b)  On  deviation  from  a  plane  of  the  plane  surfaces  in  the 
throat,  0,1  %  of  L. 

c)  On  the  width  between  vertical  surfaces  in  the  throat, 
0,2  %  of  this  width  with  a  maximum  of  0,01  m. 

d)  On  the  average  longitudinal  and  transverse  slopes  of 
the  base  of  the  throat  0,1  %. 

e)  On  a  slope  of  inclined  surfaces  in  the  throat,  0,1  %. 

f >    On  a  length  of  the  throat,  1  %  of  L. 

g)     On  deviation  from  a  cylindrical  or  a  conical  surface  in 
the  entrance  transition  to  the  throat,  0,1  %  of  L. 


h)     On  deviation  from  a  plane  of  the  plane  surfaces  in  the 
entrance  transition  to  the  throat,  0,1  %  of  L. 

j)     On  deviation  from  a  plane  of  the. plane  surfaces  in  the 
exit  transition  from  the  throat,  0,3  %  of  L. 

k)     On  other  vertical  or  inclined  surfaces,  deviation  from  a 
plane  or  curve,  1  %. 

m)     On  deviation  from  a  plane  of  the  bed  of  the  lined 
approach -channel,  0,1  %  of  L. 

The  structure  shall  be  measured  on  completion,  and  average 
values  of  relevant  dimensions  and  their  standard  deviations  at 
95  %  confidence  limits  computed.  The  former  shall  be  used  for 
computation  of  discharge  and  the  latter  shall  be  used  to  obtain 
the  overall  uncertainty  in  the  determination  of  discharge  (see 
13.5). 

6.4     Downstream  conditions 

The  flow  conditions  downstream  of  the  structure  are  important 
in  that  they  control  the  tail  water  level  which  may  influence  the 
operation  of  the  flume.  The  flume  shall  be  so  designed  that  it 
cannot  become  drowned  under  the  operating  conditions  (see 
10.3.1,  11.3.2  and  12.3.2).  Construction  of  a  flume  in  a  river  or 
stream  may  alter  flow  conditions  and  cause  scouring 
downstream  of  the  structure.  This  may  result  in  accumulation 
of  river  bed  material  further  downstream  which,  in  time,  may 
raise  the  normal  water  level  sufficiently  to  drown  the  flume, 
particularly  at  low  rates  of  flow.  Any  such  accumulation  of 
material  shall  be  removed  before  it  becomes  excessive. 


7     Maintenance  —  General  requirements 

Maintenance  of  the  measuring  structure  and  the  approach 
channel  is  important  to  secure  accurate  continuous 
measurements. 

It  is  essential  that  the  approach  channel  to  flumes  shall  be  kept 
clean  and  free  from  silt  and  vegetation  as  far  as  practicable  for 
at  least  the  distance  specified  in  6.2.2.2.  The  float-well,  and  the 
entry  from  the  approach  channel  shall  also  be  kept  clean  and 
free  from  deposits. 

The  throat  and  the  curved  entry  to  a  flume  shall  be  kept  clean 
and  free  from  algal  growths. 


8    Measurement  of  head 

8.1     General  requirements 

8.1.1  Where  spot  measurements  are  required,  the  head 
upstream  of  the  flume  throat  can  be  measured  by  a  vertical  or 
inclined  gauge,  a  hook,  point,  wire  or  tape  gauge.  Where  a 
continuous  record  is  required,  a  recording  gauge  shall  be  used. 
The  location  of  the  head  measurement  section  is  dealt  with  in 
10.2,  11.2  and  12.2. 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


8.1.2  As  the  size  of  the  flume  and  the  head  on  it  reduces, 
small  errors  in  construction  and  in  the  zero  setting  and  reading 
of  the  head  measuring  device  become  of  greater  relative  impor- 
tance. 

8.2    Gauge  well 

8.2.1  It  is  usual  to  measure  the  head  in  a  separate  gauge  well 
to  reduce  the  effects  of  water  surface  irregularities.  When  this 
is  done,  it  is  also  desirable  to  measure  the  head  in  the  approach 
channel  as  a  check. 

8.2.2  The  gauge  well  shall  be  vertical  and  of  sufficient  height 
and/or  depth  to  cover  the  full  range  of  water  levels.  In  field 
installations  it  shall  have  a  minimum  margin  of  0,3  m  over  the 
maximum  water  level  estimated  to  be  measured.  At  the  recom- 
mended position  for  the  measurement  of  head,  the  well  shall  be 
connected  to  the  approach  channel  by  means  of  a  pipe  or  slot. 


100  mm  diameter  pipe  is  usually  suitable  for  a  flow  measure- 
ment in  the  field.  A  diameter  of  3  mm  may  be  appropriate  in  the 
laboratory. 

8.3    Zero  setting 

8.3.1  Initial  setting  of  the  zero  of  the  head-measuring  device 
accurately  with  reference  to  the  level  of  the  invert  of  the  throat, 
and  regular  checking  of  this  setting  thereafter,  is  essential  if 
overall  accuracy  is  to  be  attained. 

8.3.2  An  accurate  means  of  checking  the  zero  shall  be  pro- 
vided. The  instrument  zero  should  be  obtained  by  a  direct 
reference  to  the  throat  invert,  and  a  record  of  the  setting  made 
in  the  approach  channel  and  in  the  gauge  well.  A  zero  check 
based  on  the  water  level  (either  when  the  flow  ceases  or  just 
begins)  is  liable  to  serious  errors  due  to  surface  tension  effects 
and  shall  not  be  used. 


8.2.3  Both  the  well  and  the  connecting  pipe  or  slot  shall  be 
watertight,  and  where  the  well  is  designed  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  the  float  of  a  level  recorder,  it  shall  be  of  adequate  size 
and  depth  to  give  clearance  around  the  float  at  all  stages.  The 
float  shall  not  be  nearer  than  0,075  m  to  the  wall  of  the  well. 

8.2.4  The  pipe  or  slot  shall  have  its  invert  not  less  than  0,06  m 
below  the  lowest  level  to  be  gauged,  and  it  shall  terminate  flush 
with  the  boundary  of  the  approach  channel  and  at  right  angles 
thereto.  The  approach  channel  boundary  shall  be  plain  and 
smooth  (equivalent  to  carefully  finished  concrete)  within  a 
distance  of  ten  times  the  diameter  of  the  pipe  or  width  of  slot 
from  the  centre  line  of  the  connection.  The  pipe  may  be  oblique 
to  the  wall  only  if  it  is  fitted  with  a  removable  cap  or  plate,  set 
flush  with  the  wall,  through  which  a  number  of  holes  are 
drilled.  The  edges  of  these  holes  shall  not  be  rounded  or 
burred. 


8.2.5  Adequate  additional  depth  shall  be  provided  in  the  well 
to  avoid  the  danger  of  the  float  grounding  either  on  the  bottom 
or  on  any  accumulation  of  silt  or  debris.  The  gauge  well 
arrangement  may  include  an  intermediate  chamber  of  similar 
size  and  proportions  between  it  and  the  approach  channel,  to 
enable  silt  and  other  debris  to  settle  out  where  they  may  be 
readily  seen  and  removed. 

8.2.6  The  diameter  of  the  connecting  pipe  or  width  of  slot 
shall  be  sufficient  to  permit  the  water  level  in  the  well  to  follow 
the  rise  and  fall  of  head  without  appreciable  delay,  but  on  the 
other  hand  it  shall  be  as  small  as  possible  consistent  with  ease 
of  maintenance,  to  damp  out  oscillations  due  to  short  period 
waves. 

8.2.7  No  firm  rule  can  be  laid  down  for  determining  the  size  of 
the  connecting  pipe  or  slot,  because  this  is  dependent  on  the 
circumstances  of  the  particular  installation,  for  example 
whether  the  site  is  exposed  and  thus  subject  to  waves,  and 
whether  a  large  diameter  well  is  required  to  house  the  floats  of 
recorders.  It  is  preferable  to  make  the  connection  too  large 
rather  than  too  small,  because  a  restriction  can  easily  be  added 
later  tf  short  period  waves  are  not  adequately  damped  out.  A 


9    Determination  of  discharge 
9.1     General  equations  for  discharge 

9.1.1  Critical  depth  theory,  augmented  by  experimental  data, 
may  be  used  to  deduce  the  basic  equations  for  free  discharge 
through  a  streamlined  contraction.  The  simple  theory  relates  to 
the  fricttonless  flow  of  an  ideal  fluid,  and  an  additional  coeffi- 
cient has  to  be  introduced  in  practice,  either  based  on  experi- 
ment or  deduced  by  considering  a  modification  to  the  simple 
theory,  taking  account  of  the  boundary  layer  development  with 
a  real  fluid  such  as  water.  This  International  Standard  describes 
desk  calculating  methods  for  determining  discharge  but  where 
many  structures  are  being  considered,  computer  analysis  may 
be  more  appropriate. 

9.1.2  The  specific  energy,  E,  of  flow  in  an  open  channel  is 
given  by  : 

E  =  fid  +  av^Ug  ...  (1) 

where 

d    is  the  depth  of  flow; 

v    is  the  average  velocity  through  the  section; 

a    is  the  coefficient  taking  into  account  non-uniformity  in 
velocity  distribution; 

fi    is  the  coefficient  dependent  on  the  mean  curvature  of 
the  streamlines. 

The  equation  of  continuity  is  : 

Q  =  Av  ...  (2) 

where 

Q    is  the  total  discharge; 

A     is  the  area  of  the  flow  cross-section. 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


Hence 


E  =  fid  +  aQ2/2gA2 


(3) 


Critical  flow  occurs  when  E  has  its  minimum  value  for  a  given 
discharge  Q,  treating  the  depth  d,  and  the  area  A  which  is 
related  to  it  for  any  given  cross-section  geometry,  as  the 
variables.  It  can  be  shown  that  the  specific  energy  is  a  minimum 
when 


2  _  §1^1 


Qz  = 


where  w  is  the  water  surface  width. 


...  (4) 


9.1.3  Experimentally  observed  velocity  profiles  indicate  that 
the  velocity  distribution  is  almost  uniform  in  the  throat  of 
a  flume,  and  it  may  be  assumed  therefore  that  a  =  1.  If 
the  streamlines  are  not  significantly  curved,  a  condition 
approached  if  the  throat  is  in  excess  of  a  certain  minimum 
length,  then  fi  =  1.  Hence  the  basic  equation  defining  critical 
flow  through  a  streamlined  contraction  is 


Q  =  igA3c/wcV/2 
the  subscript  c  indicating  critical  flow. 


(5) 


9.1.4  Equation  (5)  is  not  immediately  applicable  to  the 
theoretical  derivation  of  a  stage-discharge  relationship, 
because  : 

a)  it  does  not  take  account  of  the  development  of  a  boun- 
dary layer  of  slower  moving  fluid  in  the  throat; 

b)  it  is  based  on  the  area  and  water  surface  width  at  the 
critical  section,  the  location  of  which  is  ill-defined  so  that 
direct  measurement  of  the  water  level  at  that  section  is 
impractical. 

Thus  the  basic  equation  has  to  be  transformed  into  a  more 
practical  form,  and  adjusted  to  take  account  of  the  boundary 
effects. 


9.2    Calculation  of  discharge  from  observed  head 

9.2.1  For  the  flow  of  a  real  fluid  through  a  streamlined  rec- 
tangular contraction,  equation  (5)  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of 
the  effective  total  head  as  follows  : 

Q=[^)       be^Hl'2  ...(6) 

where, 

be    is  the  effective  width  of  flume  throat; 
He    is  the  effective  total  head. 

9.2.2  Equation  (6)  can  then  be  expressed  in  terms  of  he,  the 
effective  head  gauged  upstream  of  the  structure,  for  flumes 
with  rectangular  throats  as  follows  : 


3/2 


Jicbhl'2 


where 


Cv  =  [HJhJ 


3/2 


(7) 


(8) 


Cv  is  a  dimensionless  coefficient  allowing  for  the  effect  of 
approach  velocity  on  the  measured  water  level  upstream  of  the 
weir.  Effective  heads  and  widths  can  be  determined  from 
observed  values 

a)  by  a  simple  empirical  correction  (see  10.4.1,  11.4.1  and 
12.4.1),  or 

b)  by    theoretical    considerations    of    boundary    layer 
development  (see  annex  D). 

9.2.3  Analogous  relationships  can  be  derived  for  flumes  with 
trapezoidal  throats  : 


2\3/2 


v     s    e    e 


(9) 


where 


Cs    is  a  numerical  coefficient  which  takes  into  account  the 
non-rectangular  flow  section. 


Cs  =  f{m  HJbe) 
H„„    is  the  effective  total  head  at  critical  section. 


(10) 


Although  theoretical  design  and  calibration  procedures  exist 
utilizing  the  above  equations,  they  are  cumbersome.  This  is 
largely  because  C,.  is  dependent  on  Hce  which  differs 
significantly  from  the  gauged  head  h.  An  alternative  method  of 
computing  discharge  from  equation  (5)  is  given  in  11.5. 

9.2.4  The  corresponding  relationship  for  U-throated  flumes 
is  : 


Q  = 


where 


2  \3/2 


JgC  C  D  h3'2 
»°     v     u      e     e 


.  (11) 


Cu    is  a  numerical  constant  which  takes  account  of  the 
non-rectangular  flow  section. 


Cu  =  WJDe) 


(12) 


De    is  the  effective  diameter  of  base  of  the  U-shaped 
throat. 


9.3    Calculation  of  stage-discharge  relationships 

9.3.1  In  the  case  of  a  flume  with  a  rectangular  throat  equa- 
tion (7)  has  to  be  used  to  compute  the  stage-discharge  relation- 
ship for  the  structure.  However,  equations  (9)  and  (11)  cannot 
conveniently  be  used  to  compute  this  relationship  for 
trapezoidal  and  U-throated  flumes.  An  alternative  approach  can 
be  used. 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


9.3.2  A  theoretical  calibration  for  a  gauging  structure  for  the 
whole  range  of  discharge  can  be  derived  by  considering  flow 
conditions  in  the  throat  of  the  flume  and  deducing  correspon- 
ding heads  and  discharges.  The  principle  of  the  method  is  to 
select  a  series  of  values  of  d^  the  critical  depth  in  the  throat, 
and  calculate  corresponding  values  of  Q  and  He  using  the 
expressions 


Q  =  [gA*/wc)V2 


(13) 


and 


9.4.4  For  a  trapezoidal  approach  channel  : 

A  =  [h  +  p)  [B  +  ma(h  +  p)}  ...  (18) 

where 

B    relates  to  the  bed  width  of  the  approach  channel; 
ma    is  the  side  slope  of  the  approach  channel  walls. 

9.4.5  For  a  U-shaped  approach  channel  : 


H„ 


<t  + 


2w„ 


.  .  (14! 


n 


A  =  —D\fl{h  +  p)/Da] 


The  effective  total  head,  He,  can  be  converted  to  total  head,  H, 
as  described  in  11.5  and  12.5  and  total  head  H,  can  be  con- 
verted to  measured  gauged  head,  h,  as  outlined  in  11.5  and 
12.5. 

9.4    Approach  velocity 

9.4.1  The  total  head  is  related  to  the  gauged  head  by  the 
equation  : 


He  =  he  +  avpZg 
where 


(15) 


va  is  the  mean  velocity  in  the  approach  channel  at  the 
gauging  section; 

a  is  a  coefficient  (the  kinetic  energy  or  Coriolis  coefficient) 
which  takes  account  of  the  fact  that  the  kinetic  energy  head 
exceeds  V \l~2-g  if  the  velocity  distribution  across  the  section 
is  not  uniform. 

In  applying  the  equations  in  this  International  Standard,  a  may 
be  taken  as  unity,  with  the  tolerances  given  in  10.7.2,  11.8.2 
and  12.7.2  and  the  provisions  of  6.2.2  and  bearing  in  mind 
annex  C. 


9.4.2  From  equations  (8)  and  (15),  coupled  with 
equations  (7),  (9)  and  (1 1 ),  a  general  relationship  for  Cv  may  be 
defined  by  : 


(C2/3_1)1/2  =  A  x    A^C    C 

3VT  A  V     S°rU 


(16) 


where  A  is  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  approach  channel 
flow. 


9.4.3    For  a  rectangular  approach  channel 

A  =  B(h  +  p)  ...  (17) 

t 
where 

B  is  the  width  of  the  approach  channel; 

p    is  the  height  of  flume  invert  above  the  invert  of  the 
approach  channel. 


.  .  .  (19) 
where  D      is  the  diametrical  width  of  the  approach  channel. 


10     Rectangular  throated  flume 
10.1     Description 

10.1.1  The  rectangular  throated  flume  consists  of  a  constric- 
tion of  rectangular  cross-section  symmetrically  disposed  with 
respect  to  the  approach  channel. 

This  is  the  most  common  type  of  flume  and  the  easiest  to  con- 
struct, but  it  cannot  be  adapted  to  suit  non-rectangular  chan- 
nels when  loss  of  head  is  important. 

10.1.2  There  are  three  types  of  rectangular  throated  flumes  : 

a)  with  side  contractions  only; 

b)  with  bottom  contraction  or  hump  only; 

c)  with  both  side  and  bottom  contractions. 

The  type  to  be  used  depends  on  downstream  conditions  at 
various  rates  of  flow,  the  maximum  rate  of  flow,  the  permissi- 
ble head  loss  and  the  limitations  of  the  hlb  ratio,  and  whether 
or  not  the  stream  carries  sediment. 

10.1.3  The  invert  of  the  throat  shall  be  level  throughout  its 
width  and  length.  The  sides  of  the  flume  throat  shall  be  vertical 
and  parallel  and  square  with  the  invert,  so  that  the  width  of  the 
throat  is  accurate  from  top  to  bottom  and  end  to  end.  The  sur- 
faces of  the  throat  and  entrance  transition  shall  be  smooth; 
they  may  be  constructed  in  concrete  with  a  smooth  finish,  or 
lined  with  a  smooth  non-corrodible  material.  The  centre  line  of 
the  throat  shall  be  in  line  with  the  centre  line  of  the  approach 
channel.  In  the  case  of  flumes  without  a  hump  (bottom  con- 
traction), the  floor  of  the  approach  channel  shall  be  level,  and 
at  no  point  higher  than  the  invert  of  the  throat,  for  a  distance  of 
at  least  2Amax  upstream  of  the  head  measurement  section. 

10.1.4  The  flume  geometry  shall  be  as  shown  in  figure  1 .  The 
radius  of  the  curved  transition  to  the  bed  and  waits  of  the  throat 
shall  be  at  least  4/j  and  2{B  -  b)  respectively.  The  1  in  6  expan- 
sion beyond  the  throat  may  be  truncated  as  shown  in  figure  1 
when  recovery  of  head  is  not  important. 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


10.1.5  When  the  required  recoverv  of  head  is  more  than 
80  %,  the  alternative  flume  geometry  with  side  and  bottom 
contractions  could  be  as  shown  in  figure  2.  The  glacis  slope 
downstream  of  the  throat  shall  be  1  in  20  for  a  length  of  2H 
(where  H  is  the  total  head  above  the  sill  of  the  hump)  beyond 
which  it  may  be  more.  The  length  of  the  side  walls  downstream 
of  throat  shall  be  AH  and  their  divergence  shall  be  1  in  10.  For 
greater  recovery  of  heads,  the  side  walls  shall  be  parallel  up  to 
the  toe  of  the  glacis  and  then  a  hyperbolic  expansion  should  be 
given  up  to  the  pont  where  the  downstream  channel  begins. 

NOTE  -  When  the  ratio  of  the  depth  of  water  downstream  above  the 
sill  of  the  throat  to  depth  of  water  upstream  over  the  sill  of  the  throat  is 
less  than  0,5,  a  flurried  standing  wave  fall  (see  figure  3)  should  be  used 
with  baffle  platform,  baffle  wall,  stilling  basin  and  deflectors  for  effi- 
cient dissipation  of  energy. 

10.2  Location  of  head  measurement  section 

The  head  on  the  flume  shall  be  measured  at  a  point  far  enough 
upstream  of  the  contraction  to  be  dear  of  the  effects  of  draw- , 
down,  but  close  enough  to  ensure  that  the  energy  loss  between 
the  section  of  measurement  and  the  throat  will  be  negligible.  It 
is  recommended  that  the  head  measurement  section  be  located 
a  distance  of  between  3  and  4  times  /?max  upstream  of  the 
leading  edge  of  the  entrance  transition. 

10.3  Provision  for  modular  flow 

10.3.1  Flow  is  modular  when  it  is  independent  of  variations  in 
tail-water  level,  and  for  this  to  be  so,  the  velocity  has  to  be  the 
critical  velocity  in  the  throat.  The  invert  level  shall  therefore  be 
at  such  an  elevation  as  to  produce  modular  flow  for  the  full 
range  of  design  discharges.  The  dimensions  of  the  flume  shall 
be  such  that  the  total  head  upstream  (relative  to  throat  invert)  is 
at  least  1,25  times  that  downstream  (assuming  subcritical  flow 
exists  downstream)  at  all  rates  of  flow.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be 
possible  to  reduce  this  difference  provided  that  the  occurrence 
of  free  discharge  is  confirmed.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the^xpan- 
sion  is  truncated,  the  ratio  shall  be  at  least  1,33. 

10.3.2  In  artificial  channels  it  is  frequently  possible  to  deter- 
mine .the  depth  downstream  at  various  rates  of  flow  with 
reasonable  accuracy,  for  example  by  means  of  a  friction  for- 
mula if  the  channel  is  long  enough  and  of  constant  slope  or  by 
reference  to  the  characteristics  of  controlling  features 
downstream. 

If  the  flume  is  to  be  installed  in  an  existing  channel  or  stream 
the  following  information  should  then  be  obtained  at  the  site  : 

a)  The  maximum  depth  recorded  with  an  estimate  of  the 
rate  of  flow  at  that  depth. 

b)  The  approximate  depths  at  two  or  more  intermediate 
rates  of  flow. 

c)  The  dead  water  level  in  the  stream,  i.e.  the  level  under 
zero  flow  conditions. 

10.4  Evaluation  of  discharge 

10.4.1  The  basic  discharge  equation  for  rectangular  throated 
flumes  is  given  in  9.2.2  and  this  may  be  rewritten  as  : 


«-f 


3;  2 


V'£  C„  CD  b  h 


3/2 


where 


Q>  = 


b)\hf 


but 


be  =  b   -26, 

h    =  h  -  St 
where  6t  is  the  boundary  layer  displacement  thickness. 
Substituting  from  (22)  to  (23)  into  (21) 

/  5         L\   ,         5         L\3'2 

i  *  -  2  —  *  —  :■  1 1  -  -*  x  — 

h 


.  (20) 

.  (21) 

.  (22) 
.  (23) 


CD=11    -2Z* 


6, 
I 


.  (24) 


where  L  is  the  length  of  prismatic  section  of  the  contraction  at 
the  flume. 

For  most  installations  with  a  good  surface  finish  the  value 
of  SJL  will,  in  practice,  lie  in  the  range  0,002  to  0,004. 
Provided  105  >  L/ks  >  4  000  and  Re  >  2  x  105,  6JL  may 
be  assumed  equal  to  0,003. 

Equation  (24)  then  becomes  : 

0,006  L\f.        0,003  Z.\3/2 


Cn 


(25) 


Various  values  of  CQ  derived  from  this  equation  are  given  in 
table  1  and  these  are  the  values  which  apply  to  well- 
constructed  installations  as  detailed  above. 

10.4.2  A  more  sophisticated  approach  is  given  in  annex  D 
which  takes  into  account  the  development  of  the  boundary 
layer  in  the  throat  of  the  flume.  This  enables  the  user  to  take 
into  account  the  variability  of  SJL  and  to  use  the  more  general 
expression  for  CD  given  in  equation  (24) . 

10.4.3  The  value  of  Cv  can  be  computed  from  equations  (16), 
(17),  (22)  and  (23),  or  more  conveniently,  can  be  read  from 
figure  6  or  extracted  from  table  2  to  a  sufficiently  close  approx- 
imation. Figure  6  is  expressed  in  terms  of  be,  he  and  A.  but  in 
practice  it  will  be  found  acceptable  to  use  b  and  h  in  place  of  b 
and  he  in  entering  the  diagram.  Table  2  implicitly  makes  this 
assumption.  In  cases  where  the  approach  channel  is  not  truly 
rectangular  in  section  where  h  is  measured,  B  can  be  deter- 
mined from  the  expression  : 


Cross-sectional  area 
h  +  p 


.  (26) 


10.4.4  The  procedure  indicated  in  10.4.3  shall  be  adopted  for 
calibration.  For  preliminary  design  purposes,  however,  in  the 
case  of  the  flume  shown  in  figure  2,  the  discharge  equation  can 
be  expressed  as  : 


Q  = 


3/2 


V?  C  b  H3/2 


(27) 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


where  C  is  the  overall  coefficient  and  for  design  purposes  may 
be  assumed  to  have  a  value  between  0,97  and  1,00. 

When  the  structure  is  combined  with  a  bridge  having  piers  in 
the  throat,  the  term  b  in  equation  (27)  can  be  replaced  by 


(b  -  npbp~  2CC  np  H) 


-where 


b      is  the  width  of  pier; 


n      is  the  number  of  piers; 

Cc     is  the  coefficient  of  contraction 

=     0,045  for  piers  with  round  nose 
=     0,040  for  piers  with  pointed  nose. 

10.5    Computation  of  stage-discharge 
relationship 

10.5.1  The  stage-discharge  relationship  for  a  rectangular 
throated  flume  is  obtained  by  considering  a  series  of  values  of 
gauged  head,  h,  and  repeating  the  method  given  in  10.4.1  to 
10.4.3  for  each.  Corresponding  gauged  heads  and  discharges 
can  then  be  plotted  to  provide  the  stage-discharge  relationship 
for  the  flume. 


10.7     Uncertainty  of  measurement 

10.7.1  The  overall  uncertainty  of  measurement  will  depend 
on  : 

a)  the  standard  of  construction  and  finish  of  the  flume; 

b)  the  uncertainty  of  the  formula  for  the  coefficient  of 
discharge; 

c)  the  uncertainty  of  the  velocity  of  approach  coefficient; 

d)  a  correct  application  of  the  installation  conditions; 

e)  the  uncertainty  of  the  zero  setting; 

f)  the  uncertainty  of  measurement  of  the  geometry  of  the 
flume; 

g)  the  accuracy  of  the  head  gauge. 

10.7.2  With  reasonable  skill  and  care  in  the  construction  of 
the  flume,  the  coefficients  are  expected  to  have  an  uncertainty 
approaching  1  %  in  favourable  circumstances,  for  example 
when  CD  and  Cv  are  not  far  from  unity.  An  estimate  of  the 
combined  percentage  uncertainty  (Xc)  on  the  coefficients  may 
be  obtained  from  the  equation  : 


Xc=   ±  [1  +-20(CV  -  C„)] 


(28) 


10.6     Limits  of  application 

10.6.1  The  practical  ower  limit  of  h  is  related  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  influence  of  fluid  properties  and  boundary 
roughness.  The  recommended  lower  limit  of  0,05  m  or  0,05£, 
whichever  is  the  greater. 

10.6.2  There  is  also  a  limit  on  the  ratio  of  the  areas  of  the 
approach  channel  and  the  throat  arising  from  difficulties 
experienced  when  the  Froude  number  in  the  approach  channel 
exceeds  0,5.  The  recommended  upper  limit  of 


bh 


B{h  +  p) 
is  0,7. 


10.6.3    Other  limitations  arise  from  inadequate  experimental 
confirmation  for  extreme  sizes  or  geometries  : 

a)  b  shall  be  not  less  than  0,10  m. 

b)  hlb  shall  be  not  more  than  3. 

c)  h  shall  be  not  more  than  2  m. 


10.6.4  hIL  should  not  exceed  0,50.  This  limitation  on  hIL 
arises  from  the  necessity  to  ensure  parallel  flow  conditions  at 
the  criticalsection  in  the  throat.  hrraJL  may  be  allowed  to  rise 
to  0,67,  with  an  additional  uncertainty  in  coefficient  of  2  %. 


10.7.3  The  method  by  which  the  uncertainty  of  the  coeffi- 
cients is  to  be  combined  with  the  uncertainties  due  to  other 
sources  of  error  is  explained  in  clause  13.  [In  applying  equa- 
tion (28),  C0  is  obtained  from  equation  (25).] 


11     Trapezoidal  throated  flumes 
11.1     Description 

11.1.1  Trapezoidal  throated  flumes  can  be  designed  to  cope 
with  many  different  'flow  conditions,  and  the  optimum  throat 
geometry  (i.e.  bed  width  and  side  slopes)  will  depend  on  the 
range  of  flow  to  be  measured  and  on  the  characteristics  of  the 
stream  or  channel  in  which  it  is  to  be  installed.  Design  methods 
by  which  the  geometry  might  be  selected  to  approximate  to  an 
existing  or  predetermined  stage-discharge  relation  are  outlined 
in  11.8. 

11.1.2  Trapezoidal  throated  flumes  should  have  a  geometry 
generally  as  indicated  in  figure  4.  In  some  circumstances, 
however,  it  will  be  appropriate  to  make  the  invert  of  the  throat 
level  with  the  invert  of  the  approach  channel,  i.e.  p  =  0;  this 
will  be  the  case  if  sediment  has  to  be  conveyed  through  the 
flume.  This  International  Standard  covers  only  that  class  of 
trapezoidal  throated  flume  in  which  the  sloping  walls  of  the 
throat  extend  above  water  level. 

11.1.3  The  flume  shall  be  installed  with  the  throat  centre  line 
in  line  with  the  centre  of  the  approach  channel.  Subcritical  flow 
shall  exist  in  the  flume  approach,  and  the  flume  shall  be 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


installed  at  such  an  elevation  as  to  operate  with  free  discharge 
throughout  the  range.  The  surfaces  of  the  flume  shall  be  of 
smooth  concrete,  galvanized  steel  or  other  smooth  non- 
corrodible  material.  The  throat  section  is  of  particular  impor- 
tance and  shall  have  a  level  invert  and  be  truly  prismatic,  the 
sloping  walls  being  plane  surfaces,  symmetrically  disposed  and 
making  a  sharp  intersection  with  the  invert  of  the  throat. 

11.1.4  The  entrance  and  exit  transitions  may  be  plane  or 
curved  surfaces  to  suit  convenience  of  construction. 

11.1.5  The  convergence  of  the  entrance  transition  on  any 
plane  section,  if  formed  from  plane  surfaces,  should  not  be 
more  than  1  in  3  at  each  side.  If  curved  surfaces  are  used,  these 
shall  be  well-streamlined,  for  example  by  using  the  face  of  in- 
clined cylinders,  or  a  skew  cylinder,  or  a  vertical-axis  cone.  The 
surfaces  shall  lie  entirely  inside  (i.e.  on  the  channel  centre-line 
side  of)  planes  defining  a  1  in  3  convergence  on  each  side,  and 
if  curved  shall  terminate  truly  tangential  to  the  planes  forming 
the  throat. 

1 1 . 1 .6  The  surfaces  forming  the  exit  transition  shall  lie  entirely 
inside  planes  defining  a  1  in  3  expansion  on  each  side.  A  1  in  6 
expansion  gives  very  good  recovery  of  head  and  a  high  modular 

limit. 

11.2  Location  of  head  measurement  section 

The  head  on  the  flume  shall  be  measured  at  a  point  far  enough 
upstream  of  the  contraction  to  be  clear  of  the  effects  of  draw- 
down, but  close  enough  to  ensure  that  the  energy  loss  between 
the  section  of  measurement  and  the  throat  will  be  negligible.  It 
is  recommended  that  the  head  measurement  section  shouldije 
located  a  distance  of  between  3  and  4  times  /imax  upstream  of 
the  leading -edge  of  the  entrance  transition. 

11.3  Provision  for  modular  flow 

11.3.1  Flow  is  modular  when  it  is  independent  of  variations  in 
tail-water  level,  and  for  this  to  be  so,  the  velocity  shall  pass 
through  the  critical  velocity  in  the  throat.  The  invert  level  shall 
therefore  be  at  such  an  elevation  as  to  produce  modular  flow 
for  the  full  range  of  design  discharges.  The  dimensions  of  the 
flume  shall  be  such  that  the  total  head  upstream  is  well  in 
excess  of  that  downstream  when  related  to  the  invert  of  the 
throat  (assuming  subcritical  flow  exists  downstream). 

11.3.2  As  the  modular  limit  is  dependent  on  head  recovery 
beyond  the  throat,  the  necessary  ratio  of  upstream  to 
downstream  head  is  dependent  on  the  angle  of  expansion,  as 
follows  : 

1  in  20  each  side  HIHd  >  1,10 

1  in  10  each  side  H!Hd  >  1,20 

1  in  6  each  side  HIHd  >  1,25 

1  in  3  each  side  HIHd  >  1 ,35 

where  Hd  is  the  total  head  just  beyond  the  exit  transition, 
related  to  the  flume  invert. 


11.3.3  In  artificial  channels,  it  is  frequently  possible  to  deter- 
mine the  depth  downstream  at  various  rates  of  flow  approx- 
imately, for  example  by  means  of  a  friction  formula  if  the  chan- 
nel is  long  enough  and  of  constant  slope  or  by  reference  to  the 
characteristics  of  controlling  features  downstream. 


11.3.4  If  the  flume  is  to  be  installed  in  an  existing  channel  or 
stream,  the  following  information  should  then  be  obtained  at 
the  site  : 

a)  The  maximum  depth  recorded  with  an  estimate  of  the 
rate  of  flow  at  that  depth. 

b)  The  approximate  depths  at  two  or  more  intermediate 
rates  of  flow. 

c)  The  dead  water  level  in  the  stream,  i.e.  the  level  under 
zero  flow  conditions. 


11.4    Evaluation  of  discharge 


11.4.1  The  basic  discharge  equation  for  flumes  with 
trapezoidal  throated  flumes  is  given  in  9.2.3  and  may  be 
expressed  as  : 


Q=  ifj  2V?cwc8cD6*3'2 


.  (29) 


The  modular  discharge  coefficient,  CD,  is  given  by  an  expres- 
sion analogous  to  that  for  a  rectangular  flume  as  given  in  equa- 
tion (24). 


S         L 


3         L  ^/2 


.  (30) 


where 

r\    is  a  function  of  m; 

m    is  the  slope  of  flume  sides  [m  horizontal  to  1  vertical). 

For  installations  with  a  good  surface  finish  SJL  can  be  taken  as 
0,003  and  equation  (30)  reduces  to 


L\  I  0,003  LV12 

CD=    ^1  -0,006  „  -)(l  -  * 


.  (31) 


The  value  of  rj  is  obtained  from  figure  7  and  the  value  of  the 
modular  discharge  coefficient  is  then  obtained  by  substituting 
known  values  of  r\,  L,  b  and  h  in  equation  (31). 


11.4.2    Annex  D  describes  a  method  of  determining  CD  from 
equation  (30)  taking  into  account  the  variability  of  6JL. 


11.4.3  The  value  of  Cv  can  be  computed  from  equations  (16) 
and  (18)  making  the  assumptions  that  be  =  b  and  he  =  h. 
Alternatively,  figure  6  may  be  used  in  association  with  the 
calculated  value  of  A  using  equation  (18). 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


11.4.4  The  value  of  C  to  be  inserted  in  equation  (29)  is  a 
function  of  »'HcJb  and  this  is  given  in  figure  8.  if  it  were 
accurate  to  assume  that  H  =  h,  the  gauged  head,  the  use  of 
the  basic  -equation  to  evaluate  discharge  would  be  direct, 
though  perhaps  tedious.  Initially  it  can  be  assumed  that 
//. ,,  h.  However,  to  perform  an  accurate  calibration,  or 
accurately  to  deduce  the  discharge;  for  a  spot  measurement 
of  head,  successive  approximation  is  necessary,  using  the 
equation  : 


mflc 
h 


mh 

e 


C2/3 


(32) 


For  practical  purposes  it  is  sufficiently  accurate  to  make  the 
assumption  that  h  =  h  and  be  -  h  giving  a  more  readily 
usable  expression  : 


mH 

c 

b~~ 


mh 


C2/3 


.  .  .  (33) 


11.4.5  The  computation  of  discharge  to  the  first  approxima- 
tion for  a  given  head  acting  on  a  trapezoidal  flume  of  known 
geometry  is  thus  made  as  follows  : 

a)  List  the  values  of  m,  mg,  b.  B,  p,  L  and  g. 

b)  Compute  the  area  of  the  approach  channel  cross- 
section  using  equation  (17)  or  equation  (18)  or 
equation  (19)  depending  on  the  shape  of  the  approach 
channel. 


c)  Calculate     r/  =  v(1  +  m2)  -  m,     or     obtain     from 
figure  7. 

d)  Calculate  CD  from  equation  (311  using  known  values  of 
t),  L,  b  and  /(. 

e)  As  a  first  approximation,  assume  mH^lb%  ~  mhlb 
and  obtain  Cs  *rom  figure  8  for  the  given  value  of  h. 

f)  Obtain  the  initial  value  of  Cv  from  figure  6  assuming  that 
he  =  h  and  be  =  b  and  entering  the  diagram  at  CJjhIA. 

g)  Calculate  the  first  approximation  value  of  Q  using  equa- 
tion (29)  with  the  above  values  of  C0,  Cs  and  Cv. 


11.4.7  The  procedure  carried  out  in  11.4.6  shall  be  repeated 
until  sufficient  precision  has  been  obtained.  An  example  of  the 
method  of  computation  of  discharge  is  given  in  annex  E. 

11.5     Computation  of  stage-discharge 
relationship 

11.5.1  Select  a  range  of  values  of  dc  the  critical  depth  in  the 
throat,  (a  roughly  logarithmic  series  is  more  convenient  than  an 
arithmetic  one)  and  for  each  value  proceed  as  follows  : 

a)  H'c  =  b  +  2mdc  ...  (34) 

b)  Ac  =  {b  +  mdc)  dc  ...  (35) 

c)  Calculate  Q  using  equation  (13) 

d)  Calculate  He  using  equation  (14) 

11.5.2  The  next  stage  is  to  calculate  the  head  correction, 
Ht  =  H  ~  He,  For  installations  with  a  good  finish  SJL  can  be 
taken  as  0,003  and  Ht  can  be  derived  but  substituting  this  value 
in  the  expression  : 


H.  = 

where 


Pc  J. 

— —  x  —  x  L 
w„         L 


P=b  +  2cL  (1  +  m2)vl 


.  .  .  (36) 


(37) 


If  the  surface  finish  is  not  smooth  the  value  of  SJL  can  be 
obtained  as  described  in  annex  D.  Substitution  of  the 
calculated  value  of  d^/L  in  equation  (36)  gives  the  value  of  Ht 
taking  into  account  the  variability  of  SJL. 

11.5.3  For  each  value  of  dc,  calculate  the  total  head, 
H  =  He  +  Ht  The  values  of  Q  and  //derived  in  11.5.1  and 
11.5.2  provide  the  total  head  discharge  relationship  for  the 
flume. 

11.5.4  To  convert  from  the  total  head,  H,  to  gauged  head,  h, 
the  expression 


H 


2g 


...  (38) 


11.4.6  Following  the  first  approximation  in  11.4.5  the  values 
of  C„  Cv  and  Q  need  refining.  CD  holds  its  final  value.  The  next 
approximation  proceeds  as  follows  : 

a)  mHcJbe  is  obtained  from  equation  (33). 

b)  Figure  8  then  provides  the  new  value  of  Cs- 

c)  C  b  hJA  can  now  be  worked  out  (assuming  be  ~  b 
and  h    =  h),  and  a  new  value  of  Cv  obtained  from  figure  6. 

d)  The  value  of  CD,  together  with  the  revised  values  of  Cv 
and  Cs  shall  then  be  inserted  in  equation  (29)  to  obtain  a 
more  accurate  figure  for  Q. 


shall  be  used,  where  Va  is  the  mean  velocity  in  the  approach 
channel  at  the  gauging  section.  In  applying  equation  (38),  the 
geometry  of  the  approach  channel  shall  be  used  to  compute  its 
cross-sectional  area  Aa.  Assuming  this  to  be  of  trapezoidal  sec- 
tion, the  appropriate  equation  is 


Aa  =  (h  +  p)  [B  +  ma[h  +  p)] 
where 

p     is  the  height  of  the  hump  at  the  throat; 
B    is  the  bed  width  of  the  approach  channel; 
m      is  its  side  slope  \m   horizontal  to  1  vertical). 


.  .  .  (39) 


10 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO   4359:  1983 


11.5.5  Because  h  occurs  implicitly  '  the  right  hand  side  of 
equation  (38),  a  method  of  successive  approximation  is  needed 
to  determine  h. 

First  approximation  : 

Set  h  -  H  and  hence  calculate  .1  ,  f'orn  equation  (39).  Insert 
'.•'.-,  in  equation  (38),  where  v  ,   --■   Q     !   .,  and  thus  obtain  h.. 

Second  approximation  : 

Obtain  ,4a2  from  equation  (39)  inserting  h  -  hv  Hence 
v~  =   Q  A^  and  h2   ^  H  -    v2d2/2i'. 

Third  approximation,  etc. 

Repeat  procedure  until  hn  -  hn  _1  is  too  small  to  have  a 
significant  effect  on  the  accuracy. 


11.6.4  Vertical  and  horizontal  guidelines  are  added  to  the 
overlay  and  the  v  =  1  and  y  -  1  co-ordinates  are  marked. 
Move  the  overlay,  keeping  the  axes  parallel  with  figure  9,  until 
the  two  plotted  points  lie  on  the  curve.  The  intercept  of  v  =  1 
on  the  overlay  with  the  r-axis  of  figure  9  gives  1/.';  and  the 
intercept  of  .v  ^-  1  on  the  overlay  with  the  .v-axis  of  figure  9 
gives  m.'.h  and  hence  m. 


11.6.5     An    example    is    shown    by    dotted    lines    for    which 


Q 


\  2 


r 


ri  2 


HJ  l  I  and  H  values  are  3,07,  2,82m;  1,34, 


/  L3  V  \3  gi 
0,21w;  corresponding  to  discharges  of  24,8  m3/s  and 
0,22  m  /s  respectively.  These  requirements  are  met  by  a  flume 
in  which  b  =  \,12.m  and  m  =  0,90. 


11.-7     Limits  of  application 


11.5.6  Having  thus  worked  out  pairs  of  values  of  Q  and  hfor  a 
series  of  values  of  d  ,  the  calibration  curve  for  the  flume  may  be 
plotted  to  large  logarithmic  scales.  Discharge  values  for 
intermediate  values  of  h  may  be  read  off  as  necessary.  Note 
that  the  calibration  curve  is  not  a  straight  line  on  a  log-log  plot. 


11.7.1  The  practical  lower  limit  of  h  is  related  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  influence  of  fluid  properties  and  boundary 
roughness.  The  recommended  lower  limit  is  0,05  m  or  0,05/,, 
whichever  is  the  greater. 


11.5.7  An  example  of  the  calculation  of  the  stage-discharge 
relationship  for  a  trapezoidal  flume  (with  and  without  boundary 
layer  corrections)  is  given  in  annex  E. 

11.6     Graphical  approach  to  design 

11.6.1  There  is  considerable  flexibility  in  the  design  of  a 
trapezoidal  throated  flume,  and  this  permits  the  designer  to 
select  values  of  m  and  b  which  will  provide  a  close  match  to  a 
predetermined  relationship  of  head-to-discharge  at  two  flows. 
For  design  purposes  an  approximate  formula  which  effectively 
assumes  Cn  =  1,0  is  adequate. 


11.7.2  hIL  should  not  exceed  0,50.  This  limitation  on  hIL 
arises  from  the  necessity  to  ensure  parallel  flow  conditions  at 
the  critical  section  in  the  throat,  h  IL  may  be  allowed  to  rise 
to  0,67  with  an  additional  uncertainty  in  coefficient  of  2  %. 


11.7.3  The  ratio  of  areas  of  the  approach  channel  and  the 
throat  should  preferably  be  such  that  the  Froude  number,  Fr,  in 
the  approach  channel  does  not  exceed  0,5  at  any  discharge. 
This  shall  be  checked  at  each  end  of  the  range,  and  at 
intermediate  flows,  using  the  equation 


Fr.  =  vJsJigAJw. 


(42) 


11.6.2    A  convenient  graphical  method  has  been  derived,  us- 
ing equation  (29)  in  the  form 


g)  bH3'2 


'(t 


.  (40) 


on  the  assumption  that  H  =  Hc  for  design  purposes. 

11.6.3  Required  values  of  Q  and  H  are  estimated  from  a 
knowledge  or  estimate  of  the  existing  stage-discharge  relation- 
ship at  the  site,  paying  due  regard  to  the  head  loss  needed  for 
free  flow,  practical  limitations  on  the  height  of  the  throat  above 
the  stream  bed  (it  shall  not  be  below  "no  flow"  level),  and  other 
limitations  given.  The  two  values  of 

r> 

.  .  .  (41) 


1&'2 


corresponding  to  these  boundary  conditions  are  worked  out 
and  plotted  on  transparent  material  against  H  as  abscissa  on 
the  same  logarithmic  scales  as  in  figure  9. 


11.7.4  It  may  be  necessary  in  some  situations  (for  example 
where  coarse  sediment  is  being  carried  which  would  deposit  in 
the  approach  channel)  to  allow  Fra  to  rise  to  0,6  but,  because 
of  surface  irregularities  at  high  Froude  numbers,  the  measure- 
ment of  head  and  performance  of  the  flume  are  less  certain, 
and  an  additional  tolerance  of  2  %  should  be  allowed  when 
0,6  >  Fra  >  0,5. 


11.7.5    Other  limitations  arise  from  inadequate  experimental 
confirmation  for  extreme  sizes  or  geometries  : 

a)  b  shall  be  not  less  than  0,1  m; 

b)  h  shall  not  be  more  than  2  m. 

c)  At  all  elevations,  the  width  between  the  throat  walls 
shall  be  less  than  the  width  between  the  approach  channel 
walls  at  the  same  elevation,  i.e.  there  shall  be  a  contraction 
wherever  the  water  surface  lies. 

d)  The  sloping  walls  of  the  throat  shall  continue  upwards 
without  change  of  slope  far  enough  to  contain  the 
maximum  discharge  to  be  measured. 


11 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


11.8     Uncertainty  of  measurement 

11.8.1  The  overall  uncertainty  of  measurement  will  depend 

on  : 

a)  the  standard  of  construction  and  finish  of  the  flume; 

b)  the  uncertainty  of  the  formula  for  the  coefficient  of 
discharge; 

c)  the  uncertainty  of  the  velocity  of  approach  coefficient; 

d)  a  correct  application  of  the  installation  conditions; 

e)  the  uncertainty  of  the  zero  setting; 

f )  the  uncertainty  of  measurement  of  the  geometry  of  the 
flume; 

g)  the  accuracy  of  the  head  gauge. 

11.8.2  With  reasonable  skill  and  care  in  the  construction  of 
the  flume  the  basic  equation  and  coefficients  are  expected  to 
have  an  uncertainty  approaching  1  %  in  favourable 
circumstances,  for  example  when  CD  and  Cv  are  not  far  from 
unity.  An  estimate  of  the  combined  percentage  uncertainty  Xc 
on  the  coefficients  can  be  obtained  from  the  equation  : 


Xc  =   ±  [1  +  20  (Cv  -  CDJ] 


(43) 


11.8.3  The  method  by  which  the  uncertainty  in  the  coeffi- 
cients is  to  be  combined  with  uncertainties  due  to  other 
sources  of  error  is  explained  in  clause  13.  [In  applying  the 
above  equation  CD  is  obtained  from  equation  (31).] 

12    U-throated  (round-bottomed)  flumes 
12.1     Description 

12.1.1  Flumes  with  their  inverts  in  the  form' of  a  cylindrical 
surface  with  a  horizontal  axis  cannot  cope  with  such  a  wide 
variety  of  situations  as  the  trapezoidal  throated  flume,  but  they 
have  advantages  over  the  rectangular  throated  flume  in  certain 
circumstances,  for  example  in  sewerage  systems  where  the 
flow  enters  from  a  circular  or  U-shaped  conduit.  The  sensitivity 
of  a  U-throated  flume  is  greater  than  that  of  a  rectangular 
throated  flume,  especially  in  the  lower  range  of  discharge  lying 
within  the  lower  semi-cylinder. 

12.1.2  U-throated  flumes  shall  have  a  geometry  generally  as 
indicated  in  figure  5.  Two  basic  types  are  available  when  the 
approach  channel  is  U-shaped  also  : 

a)  A  level  invert  arrangement  in  which  no  rise  in  invert 
level  occurs  at  the  throat. 

b)  A  raised  invert  level,  in  which  the  rise  in  invert  level  is 
half  the  difference  in  the  diametrical  widths  of  the  approach 
channel  and  throat. 


12. 1.3  The  flume  shall  be  installed  with  the  throat  centre  line 
in  line  with  the  centre  of  the  approach  channel.  Subcritical  flow 
shall  exist  in  the  flume  approach,  and  the  flume  shall  be  in- 
stalled at  such  an  elevation  as  to  operate  with  free  discharge 
throughout  the  range.  The  surfaces  of  the  flume  shall  be  of 
smooth  concrete,  galvanized  steel  or  other  smooth  non- 
corrodible  material.  The  throat  section  is  of  particular  impor- 
tance and  shall  have  a  level  invert  and  be  truly  prismatic.  The 
lower  part  shall  accurately  conform  to  the  surface  of  a  semi- 
cylinder,  and  the  walls  shall  be  plane  vertical  surfaces  parallel  to 
the  axis  of  the  semi-cylinder,  the  distance  between  them 
accurately  matching  the  invert  diameter. 

12.1.4  The  lower  part  of  the  entrance  transition,  if  formed  of  a 
part-conical,  or  part  of  a  skewed  conical,  surface  shall  generate 
a  convergence  in  any  plane  radial  to  the  flume  axis  of  not  more 
than  1  in  3.  The  upper  part  of  the  entrance  transition,  if  formed 
of  plane  surfaces,  shall  converge  at  not  more  than  1  in  3  at 
each  side.  If  curved  surfaces  are  used,  these  shall  be  well- 
streamlined,  for  example  generated  by  circular  curves,  and  shall 
lie  entirely  inside  the  alternative  part-conical  part-plane 
entrance  shown  by  the  full  lines  in  figure  5.  They  shall  ter- 
minate truly  tangential  to  the  surfaces  forming  the  throat. 

12.1.5  The  surfaces  forming  the  exit  transition  shall  lie  within 
surfaces  defining  a  1  in  3  expansion.  A  1  in  6  expansion  gives 
very  good  recovery  of  head  and  a  high  modular  limit. 


12.2    Location  of  head  measurement  section 

The  head  on  the  flume  shall  be  measured  at  a  point  far  enough 
upstream  of  the  contraction  to  be  clear  of  the  effects  of  draw- 
down, but  close  enough  to  ensure  that  the  energy  loss  between 
the  section  of  measurement  and  the  throat  will  be  negligible.  It 
is  recommended  that  the  head  measurement  section  be  located 
a  distance  of  between  3  and  4  times  hmayi  upstream  of  the 
leading  edge  of  the  entrance  transition. 


12.3    Provision  for  modular  flow 

12.3.1  Flow  is  modular  when  it  is  independent  of  variations  in 
tail-water  level,  and  for  this  to  be  so,  the  velocity  must  pass 
through  the  critical  velocity  in  the  throat.  The  invert  level  shall 
therefore  be  at  such  an  elevation  as  to  produce  modular  flow 
for  the  full  range  of  design  discharges.  The  dimensions  of  the 
flume  shall  be  such  that  the  total  head  upstream  is  well  in 
excess  of  that  downstream  (related  to  the  invert  of  the  throat). 

12.3.2  As  the  modular  limit  is  dependent  on  head  recovery 
beyond  the  throat,  the  necessary  ratio  of  upstream  to 
downstream  head  is  dependent  on  the  angle  of  expansion  as 
follows  : 


1  in  6  each  side 
1  in  3  each  side 


HIH6 


1,24 
1,35 


where  Hd  is  the  total  head  just  beyond  the  exit  transition, 
related  to  the  flume  invert. 


The  former  has  advantages  where  heavy  sediments  are  carried; 
the  latter  has  the  advantage  of  a  simpler  transition  geometry. 


12.3.3    In  artificial  channels  it  is  frequently  possible  to  deter- 
mine the  depth  downstream  at  various  rates  of  flow  with 


12 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


reasonable  accuracy,  for  example  by  means  of  a  friction  for- 
mula if  the  channel  is  long  enough  and  of  constant  slope  or  by 
reference  to  the  characteristics  of  controlling  features 
downstream. 

12.3.4  If  the  flume  is  to  be  installed  in  an  existing  channel  or 
stream,  the  following  information  shall  then  be  obtained  at  the 
site  : 

a)  The  maximum  depth  recorded  with  an  estimate  of  the 
rate  of  flow  at  that  depth. 

b)  The  approximate  depths  at  two  or  more  intermediate 
rates  of  flow. 


12.4.4  The  value  of  Cv  can  be  computed  from  equations  (16) 
and  (19)  making  the  assumption  that  hg  =  h  and  be  =  b. 
Alternatively  figure  6  gives  a  sufficiently  close  approximation. 
In  entering  figure  6,  the  value  of  Cu,  as  a  first  approximation, 
shall  be  read  from  figure  10  assuming  H^JD^  -  hID. 

12.4.5  The  approach  channel  area  required  for  the  use  in 
figure  6  is  obtained  from  the  geometry  of  the  approach  channel 
at  the  given  water  level.  If  the  approach  channel  is  U-shaped, 
and  the  water  level  lies  within  the  semi-circular  base  portion  : 


for  da  <  ™  Da 


c)     The  dead  water  level  in  the  stream,  i.e.  the  level  under 
zero  flow  conditions. 


A„  =  —  Dl  (0  -  sin  0  cos  0) 

d  4 


(49) 


12.4     Evaluation  of  discharge 

12.4,1    The  basic  discharge  equation  for  U-throated  flumes  is 
given  in  9.2.4  and  thi?  may  be  written  as  : 


where 


Q- 


where 


CD   = 


3/2 


y/i  cu  cu  CD  D  h3/2 


6         L 

2—  x  - 

L        D 


s,     A3/2 

—    X    — 

L        hj 


(44) 


(45) 


For  installations  with  a  good  surface  finish  SJL  can  be  taken  as 
0,003  and  equation  (45)  reduces  to  the  form 


1  - 


0,006L 
D 


1  - 


0,003L  V/2 


(46) 


in  order  to  compute  Q  for  a  given  value  of  ft,  it  is  therefore 
necessary  to  evaluate  the  coefficients  Cv,  Cu  and  CD. 

12.4.2  The  value  of  CD  is  computed  using  equation  (46)  and 
known  values  of  L,  D  and  h.  Annex  D  describes  a  method  of 
determining  CD  from  equation  (45)  taking  into  account  the 
variability  of  SJL. 


-1    ,.         *** 


1    „ 


£> 


=  cos 


for  gL  >  —  D„, 

a  o       a' 


A.  =  jDl  +  lda-±Da)Da 


(50) 


(51) 


where  da  =  h  +  p,  i.e.  the  depth  of  water  in  the  approach 
channel  at  the  gauging  section  relative  to  the  invert  level  at  that 
point. 

12.4.6  The  computation  of  discharge  for  a  given  head  acting 
on  a  U-shaped  flume  of  known  geometry  thus  proceeds  as 
follows  : 


a)  List  the  values  of  D,  L,  Da,  p. 

b)  Compute  the  area  of  the  approach  channel  cross- 
section.  If  it  is  U-shaped,  use  equation  (49)  or  (51). 

c)  As  a  first  approximation,  assume  HCB/De  ~  hID  and 
obtain  Cu  from  figure  10  for  the  given  value  of  h. 


12.4.3  If  it  were  correct  to  assume  that  H  -  h,  the  gauged 
head  (see  figure  10)  which  expresses  the  shape  coefficient  C 
as  a  function  of  Hce/De,  would  provide  a  value  of  C  directly 
for  a  given  head  and  throat  diameter.  Although  the  assumption 
"ce  =  h  mav  be  macle  f°r  design  purposes,  or  as  a  first 
approximation;  to  develop  an  accurate  calibration,  or  to 
accurately  deduce  the  discharge  for  a  spot  measurement  of 
head,  successive  approximation  is  required,  utilizing  the 
equation  : 


H. 


SI   -   r^2/3 


.  (47) 


For  practical  purposes  it  is  sufficiently  accurate  to  make  the 
assumption  that  he  =  h.  Hence  : 


^21  ~  £«  _  r2/3 
h~     h     ~  °v 


.  .(48) 


d)  Calculate  Cu  DhIA  and  obtain  a  first  approximation  for 
Cv  from  figure  6. 

e)  Compute  CD  from  equation  (46). 

f)  Calculate  Hce  from  equation  (48)  using  the  above  value 
of  C... 


12.4.7  Following  the  first  approximation  in  12.4.6  the  values 
of  Hce,  Cv  and  Cu  need  refining.  The  next  approximation  pro- 
ceeds as  follows  : 

a)  Making  the  assumption  that  De  =  D,  evaluate  HcJDe 
and  obtain  a  new  value  of  Cu  from  figure  10. 

b)  Evaluate  Cu  DhIA  and  obtain  a  new  value  of  Cv  from 
figure  6. 

c)  Calculate  the  new  value  of  H    using  equation  (48). 


13 


IS    14869:2000 
ISO   4359:  1983 


12.4.8  Clause  12.4.7  shall  be  repeated  until  sufficient  pre- 
cision has  been  obtained. 

1Z.4.9  Discharge  is  then  computed  from  equation  (44).  (See 
example  in  annex  E.) 

12.5     Computation  of  stage-discharge 
relationship 

12.5.1  For  flow  conditions  for  vv'iich  dc  <  Di'2,  select  a 
series  of  values  of  0,  the  semi-angle  subtended  at  the  centre  of 
curvature  of  the  invert  by  the  water  surface,  between  0,5  and 
n/2  radians.  For  each  angle,  evaluate  the  depth,  water  surface 
width  and  cross-sectional  area  from  : 


D 


1 


a      —  = 


(1   -  cos0)  =/,  (9) 


b)    —  =  sin  0  =  f2  id) 


Ai         1 

c)     — -  =  —  (6  -  sin  6  cos  B)  =  /,  (6) 

D2         4 


(52) 


...  (53) 


.  .  (54) 


fy  fy  f$  maV  be  taken  from  table  3. 

12.5.2  When  clc  >  D/2,  water  surface  width  and  cross- 
sectiona!  area  are  calculated  for  a  range  of  values  of  d  as 
follows  ; 


D 


b)    Ac=jD2+[d„ 


D     D 


.  .  .  (55) 
.  .  .  (56) 


smooth,  the  value  of  dJL  can  be  obtained  as  described  in 
annex  D.  Substitution  of  the  calculated  value  of  dJL  in  equa- 
tion (57)  gives  the  value  of  H  taking  into  account  the  variability 
of  3  ,'L. 


12.5.5     For    each    value    of    d,.,    calculate    the    total    head. 
//  =  li    ■*■  H  .  The  values  of  O  and  H  derived  in  12.5.3  and 

e  » 

12.5.5  provide  the  total   head  "discharge  relationship  for  the 
flume. 


12.5.6     To  convert  from  total  head,  H,  to  gauged  head,  /;,  the 
expression 


h  =  H  - 


2g 


.  (60) 


shall  be  used,  where  v'a  is  the  mean  velocity  in  the  approach 
channel  at  the  gauging  section.  For  applying  equation  (60),  the 
geometry  of  the  approach  channel  shall  be  used  to  compute  its 
cross-sectional  area  Aa-  Assuming  this  to  be  of  U-shape,  the 
appropriate  equations  are  : 


Dl 


>■ 


cos*,)  =  /,  m 


.  .  .  (61i 


with  0„  =  arc  cos  (  —  Z)„ 


when  (h  +  p)  <  DJ2 
and 


\  =   g  £>l+  [h 


h-p)/  ~Da 


DJ  D, 


.  (62) 


12.5.3  The  calculations  described  in  12.5. 1  and  12.5.2  provide 
a  series  of  corresponding  values  of  dc,  wc  and  Ac  throughout 
the  full  range  of  a  U-throated  flume.  The  discharge,  Q,  and  the 
effective  upstream  head,  He,  for  each  value  of  dQ  can  then  be 
calculated  using  equations  (13)  and  (14)  respectively. 


when  (h  +  p)  >  DJ2 

where  6a  is  the  semi-angle  subtended  at  the  centre  of  curvature 
of  the  invert  of  the  approach  channel  by  the  water  surface,  Da 
is  the  width  of  the  approach  channel  and  p  is  the  height  of  the 
hump  at  the  throat. 


12.5.4  The  next  stage  is  to  calculate  the  head  correction, 
/■/,  =  H  -  He.  For  installations  with  a  good  surface  finish, 
5JL  can  be  taken  as  0,003  and  Hm  can  be  derived  by 
substituting  this  value  in  the  expression  : 


H    = 


x  —  x  L 


where 


P.  =  DB 


oi 


/>,  = 


2 


+  2^-2* 


.  .  (57) 


(58) 


.  (59) 


12.5.7  Because  h  occurs  implicitly  in  the  right  hand  side  of 
equation  (60),  a  method  of  successive  approximation  is  needed 
to  work  out  h. 

First  approximation  : 

Set  h  =  H  and  hence  calculate  /lal  from  either  equation  (61 ) 
or  equation  (62).  Insert  7a1  in  equation  (60),  where 
v"al  =  QIAaV  and  thus  obtain  hy 

Second  approximation  : 

Obtain  Aa2  from  equation  (61)  or  (62)  inserting  h  =  hy  Hence 
Va2  =  Q/Aa2  and  h2  =  H  -  vl2/2g. 

Third  approximation,  etc.  : 


Equation  (58)  applies  when  dc  <  D/2  {6  <  n/2)  and  equa- 
tion (59)  applies  when  dc  >  D/2.  If  the  surface  finish  is  not 


Repeat  procedure  until  hn  -  hn 
significant  effect  on  the  accuracy. 


is  too  small  to  have  a 


14 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


12.5.8  Having  thus  worked  out  pairs  of  values  of  Q  and  h  for  a 
series  of  values  of  dc,  the  calibration  curve  for  the  flume  may  be 
plotted  to  large  logarithmic  scales.  Discharge  values  for 
intermediate  values  of  h  may  be  read  off  as  necessary.  Note 
that  the  calibration  curve  is  hot  a  straight  line  on  a  log-log  plot. 

12.5.9  An  example  of  the  calculation  of  the  stage-discharge 
relationship  for  a  U-throated  flume  (with  and  without  boundary 
layer  corrections)  is  given  in  annex  E. 


c)  the  uncertainty  of  the  velocity  of  approach  coefficient; 

d)  a  correct  application  of  the  installation  conditions; 

e)  the  uncertainty  of  the  zero  setting; 

f)  the  uncertainty  of  measurement  of  the  geometry  of  the 
flume; 

g)  the  accuracy  of  the  head  gauge. 


12.6     Limits  of  application 

12.6.1  The  practical  lower  limit  of  h  is  related  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  influence  of  fluid  properties  and  boundary 
roughness.  The  recommended  lower  limit  is  0,05  m  or  0,05  L 
whichever  is  the  greater. 

12.6.2  hIL  should  not  exceed  0,50.  This  limitation  on  hIL 
arises  from  the  necessity  to  ensure  parallel  flow  conditions  at 
the  critical  section  in  the  throat,  h  IL  may  be  allowed  to  rise 
to  0,67,  with  an  additional  uncertainty  in  coefficient  of  2  %. 

12.6.3  The  ratio  of  areas  of  the  approach  channel  and  the 
throat  should  preferably  be  such  that  the  Froude  number,  Fr,  in 
the  approach  channel  does  not  exceed  0,5  at  any  discharge. 
This  shall  be  checked  at  each  end  of  the  range,  and  at 
intermediate  flows,  using  the  equation  : 


Fr    =  vJ^gAJw) 


(63) 


12.6.4  It  may  be  necessary  in  some  situations  (for  example 
where  coarse  sediment  is  being  carried  which  would  deposit  in 
the  approach  channel)  to  allow  Fra  to  rise  to  0,6  but,  because 
of  surface  irregularities  at  high  Froude  numbers,  the  measure- 
ment of  head  and  performance  of  the  flume  are  less  certain, 
and  an  additional  tolerance  of  2  %  should  be  allowed  when 
0,6  >  Fr    >  0,5. 


12.7.2  With  reasonable  skill  and  care  in  the  construction  of 
the  flume,  the  basic  equation  and  coefficients  are  expected  to 
have  an  uncertainty  approaching  1  %  in  favourable 
circumstances,  for  example  when  CD  and  Cv  are  not  far  from 
unity.  An  estimate  of  the  combined  percentage  uncertainty 
(Xc)  on  the  coefficients  may  be  obtained  from  the  equation  : 


Xc  =   ±  [1  +  20  (Cv 


CJ]  % 


(64) 


12.7.3  The  method  by  which  the  uncertainty  of  the  coeffi- 
cients is  to  be  combined  with  the  uncertainties  due  to  other 
sources  of  uncertainty  is  explained  in  clause  13. 


13    Errors  in  flow  measurement 
13.1     General 

13.1.1  The  total  uncertainty  of  any  flow  measurement  can 
be  estimated  if  the  uncertainties  from  various  sources  are 
combined.  The  assessment  of  these  contributions  to  the  total 
uncertainty  will  indicate  whether  the  rate  of  flow  can  be 
measured  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  the  purpose  in  hand. 
This  clause  is  intended  to  provide  sufficient  information  for  the 
user  of  this  International  Standard  to  estimate  the  uncertainty 
in  a  measurement  of  discharge  (see  ISO  5168). 


12.6.5     Other  limitations  arise  from  inadequate  experimental 
confirmation  for  extreme  sizes  or  geometries  : 

a)  D  shall  be  at  least  0,1  m, 

b)  h  shall  be  not  more  than  2  m. 

c)  At  all  elevations,  the  width  between  the  throat  walls 
shall  be  less  than  the  width  between  the  approach  channel 
walls  at  the  same  elevation,  i.e.  there  shall  be  a  contraction 
wherever  the  water  surface  lies. 

12.7    Uncertainty  of  measurement 

12.7.1    The  overall  uncertainty  of  measurement  will  depend 
on  : 

a)  the  standard  of  construction  and  finish  of  the  flume; 

b)  the  uncertainty  of  the  formula  for  the  coefficient  of 
discharge; 


13.1.2  The  error  may  be  defined  as  the  difference  between 
the  true  rate  of  flow  and  that  calculated  in  accordance  with  the 
equations  used  for  calibrating  the  flume,  which  is  assumed  to 
be  constructed  and  installed  in  accordance  with  this  Interna- 
tional Standard.  The  term  uncertainty  is  here  used  to  denote 
the  deviation  from  the  true  rate  of  flow  within  which  the 
measured  flow  is  expected  to  lie  some  nineteen  times  out  of 
twenty  (with  95  %  confidence  limits). 

13.2    Sources'  of  error 

13.2.1  The  sources  of  error  in  the  discharge  measurement 
may  be  identified  by  considering  a  generalized  form  of 
discharge  equation  for  flumes 


«-if 


3/2 


CDCCsbyfeh*f2 


.  .  .  (65) 


NOTE  —  For  U-throated  flumes  Cs  is  replaced  by  Cu,  and  b  =  D. 
(2/3)3/2is  a  numerical  constant  not  subject  to  error;  g,  the  acceleration 
due  i to  gravity,  varies  from  place  to  place,  but  the  variation  may  be 
neglected  in  flow  measurement. 


15 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


13.2.2    The  only  sources  of  error  which  need  to  be  considered 
further  are  : 

a)     The   discharge   coefficient    CD   and    the   velocity   of 
approach  coefficient  C  .  Numerical  estimates  and  uncer- 


tainties in  the  combined  coefficient  Cv 
11.8  and  12.7. 


CD  are  given  in  10.7, 


b)  The  shape  coefficient,  Cs,  for  a  trapezoidal  throated 
flume  or  Cu,  for  a  U-throated  flume,  is  assumed  to  be  ac- 
curately computed.  The  combined  percentage  uncertainty 
Xc  is  assumed  to  be  covered  by  the  uncertainties  in  the 
coefficients  CDCV.  However,  Cs  is  dependent  on  a 
knowledge  of  the  side  slope,  m,  and  allowance  shall  be 
made  for  inaccuracy  in  estimating  m. 


c)  The  dimensional  measurement  of  the  structure,  for 
example  the  bed  width  of  the  flume,  b,  or  the  diameter  of 
the  U-throated  Tlume,  D. 

d)  The  measured  head,  h. 

13.2.3  The  uncertainties  in  b  (or  D)  and  h  have  to  be 
estimated  by  the  user.  The  uncertainty  in  dimension  will  de- 
pend upon  the  accuracy  to  which  the  device  as  constructed  can 
be  measured;  in  practice  this  uncertainty  may  prove  to  be  in- 
significant in  comparison  with  other  uncertainties.  The  uncer- 
tainty in  the  head  will  depend  upon  the  accuracy  of  the  head- 
measuring  device,  the  determination  of  the  gauge  zero,  and 
upon  the  technique  used.  This  may  be  small  if  a  vernier  or 
micrometer  instrument  is  used,  with  a  zero  determination  of 
comparable  precision. 


13.3     Kinds  of  error 

13.3.1  Errors  can  be  classified  as  random  or  systematic,  the 
former  affecting  the  reproducibility  (precision)  of  measurement 
and  the  latter  affecting  its  true  accuracy. 

13.3.2  The  standard  deviation  of  a  set  of  n  measurements  of  a 
quantity  Y  under  steady  conditions  may  be  estimated  from  the 
equation 


1/2 


_     n  -  1 

where  J  is  the  arithmetic  mean  of  the  n  measurements. 
The  standard  deviation  of  the  mean  is  then  given  by  : 


V^ 


(66) 


(67) 


and  the  uncertainty  of  the  mean  is  twice  Sy  (to  95  %  prob- 
ability)11. This  uncertainty  is  the  contribution  of  the  observa- 
tions of  Y  to  the  total  uncertainty. 


13.3.3  A  measurement  may  also  be  subject  to  systematic 
error;  the  mean  of  very  many  measured  values  would  thus  still 
differ  from  the  true  value  of  the  quantity  being  measured.  An 
error  in  setting  the  zero  of  a  water  level  gauge  to  invert  level,  for 
example,  produces  a  systematic  difference  between  the  true 
mean  measured  head  and  the  actual  value.  As  repetition  of  the 
measurement  does  not  eliminate  systematic  errors,  the  actual 
value  can  only  be  determined  by  an  independent  measurement 
known  to  be  more  accurate. 


13.4     Errors  in  coefficient  values 

13.4.1  All  errors  in  this  category  are  systematic. 

13.4.2  The  values  of  the  various  coefficients  quoted  in  this  In- 
ternational Standard  are  derived  from  theoretical  considera- 
tions. The  limitations  quoted  are  those  necessary  to  restrict  ap- 
plication to  those  conditions  where  experiment  has  shown  that 
the  theory  of  critical  flow  and  the  assessment  of  boundary  layer 
displacement  thickness  are  applicable. 

13.4.3  The  uncertainties  in  the  coefficients  quoted  in  the 
preceding  sections  of  this  International  Standard  are  based  on 
an  assessment  of  the  uncertainties  in  the  estimate  of  boundary 
layer  displacement  thickness,  in  the  allowance  for  approach 
velocity  and  in  the  use  of  graphs  for  Cu,  Cs,  etc.  The  deviation 
of  experimental  data  from  various  sources  from  theoretical 
prediction  is  consistent  with  these  suggested  values  of  uncer- 
tainty. 


13.5    Errors  in  measurement 

13.5.1  Both  random  and  systematic  errors  will  occur  in 
measurements  made  by  the  user. 

13.5.2  Since  neither  the  methods  of  measurement  nor  the 
way  in  which  they  are  to  be  made  are  specified,  no  numerical 
values  for  uncertainties  in  this  category  can  be  given;  they  have 
to  be  estimated  by  the  user.  For  example,  consideration  of  the 
method  of  measuring  the  flume  should  permit  the  user  to  deter- 
mine the  uncertainties  in  the  bed  width,  b,  the  side-slope  m  in 
the  case  of  trapezoidal  throated  flumes,  and  the  diameter  D  of 
a  U-throated  flume. 

13.5.3  The  discharges  given  by  the  equations  are  volumetric 
figures,  and  the  fluid  density  does  not  affect  the  volumetric 
discharge  for  a  given  head  provided  the  operative  head  is 
gauged  in  fluid  of  identical  density.  If  the  gauging  is  carrred  out 
in  a  separate  well,  a  correction  for  the  difference  in  density  may 
be  necessary  if  the  temperature  in  the  well  is  significantly  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  the  flowing  fluid.  However,  it  is  assumed 
herein  that  the  densities  are  equal. 

13.5.4  The  uncertainty  of  the  gauged  head  should  be  deter- 
mined from  an  assessment  of  the  separate  sources  of  uncer- 
tainty, for  example  the  zero  uncertainty,  the  gauge  sensitivity, 


1)     This  factor  of  two  assumes  that  n  is  large.  For  n  =  6  the  factor  should  be  2,6;  n  =  8  requires  2,4;  n  =  10  requires  2,3;  n  =  15  requires  2,1 . 


16 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


backlash  in  the  indication  mechanism,  the  residual  random 
uncertainty  in  the  mean  of  a  series  of  measurements,  etc.  The 
uncertainty  of  the  gauged  head  is  the  square  root  of  the  sum  of 
the  squares  of  the  separate  uncertainties. 

13.5.5  The  above  component  uncertainties  should  be 
calculated  at  the  95  %  confidence  limits  but  when  the  value  of 
a  component  uncertainty  is  determined  from  only  a  single 
measurement,  it  is  said  to  be  rectangularly  distributed  and  the 
uncertainty  may  be  taken,  for  the  purpose  of  this  International 
Standard,  to  be  the  (plus  or  minus)  limits  within  which  the  true 
value  is  known  to  lie  (i.e.  half  the  estimated  maximum  devia- 
tion), 


13.6     Combination  of  uncertainties  to  give  overall 
uncertainty  on  discharge 

13.6.1  The  total  uncertainty  is  the  resultant  of  several  con- 
tributory uncertainties,  which  may  themselves  be  composite 

uncertainties  (see  13.5.4). 

13.6.2  The  uncertainty  of  the  rate  of  flow  shall  be  calculated 
from  the  following  equation  : 


x  =  ±  v<*c +  y2  xl  +  <t>2  xl  +  v1  xl) 

where 

Xr  is  the  percentage  uncertainty  in  Cv  CD; 

Xb  is  the  percentage  uncertainty  in  b  (or  D); 

Xh  is  the  percentage  uncertainty  in  h; 

Xm  is  the  percentage  uncertainty  in  m. 


(68) 


y,  <p  and  y  are  numerical  coefficients  depending  on  the  flume 
geometry.  In  the  simple  case  of  a  rectangular  flume,  y  =  1, 
<p  =  1,5,  and  *//  =  0  (assuming  the  walls  are  truly  vertical).  For 
a  trapezoidal  throated  flume,  y  and  >//  depend  on  mHJb,  and 
are  shown  in  figure  11 .  For  a  U-throated  flume,  y/  -  0  (assum- 
ing the  walls  are  truly  vertical);  y  and  0  depend  on  HJD  and 
are  shown  in  figure  11.  (In  using  these  curves,  the  approxima- 
tion Hc  ~  h  may  be  used.) 

In  the  above 


X,   =   ±  100  x  ~ 

0  b 


Xh=   ± 


100  [,e2  +  fl+  ...  (2SW)2V>2 


(69) 


(70) 


where 

Eb    is  the  uncertainty  in  width  measurement; 

ieA-  -£h<  etc-'  are  uncertainties  in  head  measurement  (see 
13.5.4); 

2S^-  is  the  uncertainty  of  the  mean  if  a  series  of  readings  of 
the  head  measurement  are  taken  (see  13.3.2  including  foot- 
note). 

13.6.3  It  should  be  realized  that  the  uncertainty  X  is  not  a 
single  value  for  a  given  device,  but  will  vary  with  discharge.  It 
may  therefore  be  necessary  to  consider  the  uncertainty  at 
several  discharges  covering  the  required  range  of  measure- 
ment. 

13.6.4  An  example  of  the  calculation  of  the  combined  uncer- 
tainties is  given  in  annex  F. 


17 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


Annex  A 

Guide  for  the  selection  of  weirs  and  flumes  for  the 
measurement  of  the  discharge  of  water  in  open  channels 


A.1     Scope  and  field  of  application 

This  annex  lays  down  guidelines  for  the  selection  of  weirs  and 
flumes  for  the  measurement  of  discharge  in  open  channels. 
Consideration  is  limited  to  the  steady,  uniform  flow  of  water  at 
ordinary  temperatures  (approximately  5  to  30  °C). 

Despite  the  great  number  of  types  of  weirs  and  flumes 
available,  some  of  which  may  offer  advantages  for  specific  pur- 
poses, only  the  following  types  are  presently  standardized. 
Criteria  for  selection  from  among  the  standard  types  are  given 
in  clause  A. 3. 


A. 2    Types  of  standard  weirs  and  flumes 

A. 2.1    Thin-plate  weir 

A  weir  constructed  with  a  crest  of  vertical  thin  plate,  shaped  in 
such  a  manner  that  the  nappe  springs  clear  of  the  crest,  the 
discharge  being  determined  by  the  head  on  the  weir  and  the 
width  of  the  crest  (or  the  angle  of  the  notch). 

The  following  types  are  included  : 

—  rectangular  full-width  weir; 

—  rectangular-notch  weir; 

—  triangular-notch  (V-notch)  wair. 

A.2.2     Broad-crested  weir 

A  weir  with  substantial.crest  dimension  in  the  direction  of  flow 
formed  in  such  a  manner  that  critical  flow  occurs  on  the  crest 
of  the  weir  within  the  breadth,  the  discharge  being  determined 
by  the  head  on  the  weir  and  the  width  of  the  crest. 

The  following  types  are  included  : 

—  rectangular-profile  weir  with  sharp  upstream  edge; 

—  rectangular-profile  weir  with  rounded  upstream  edge. 

A.2.3    Triangular-profile  weir 

A  weir  having  a  triangular  profile  in  the  direction  of  flow,  the 
discharge  being  determined  by  the  head  over  the  weir  and  the 
Width  of  the  crest. 

The  following  type  is  included  : 

—  triangular-profile  weir  having  1 :2  slope  upstream  and 
1:5  slope  downstream. 


A. 2.4    Standing-wave  flume  (free  flow) 

A  flume  with  side  contractions  with  or  without  bottom  contrac- 
tions, within  which  the  flow  changes  from  sub-critical  to  super- 
critical, the  discharge  being  determined  by  the  cross-sectional 
area  and  velocity  of  flow  at  critical  depth  within  the  throat  of 
the  flume. 

The  following  types  are  included  : 

—  with  rectangular  throat; 

—  with  trapezoidal  throat; 

—  with  U-throat. 

A.2.5    Free  overfall 

An  abrupt  drop  in  the  floor  of  a  rectangular  channel,  the 
discharge  being  determined  by  the  depth  at  the  brink  of  the 
drop  and  the  width  of  the  channel  at  the  brink  section. 

A. 3    Criteria  for  selection  of  standard  weirs 
or  flumes 

The  essential  criteria  for  selection  from  among  the  standard 
weirs  and  flumes  are  given  below. 

A.3.1    Available  difference  in  water  levels 

Thin-plate  weirs  and  free  overfalls  require  a  sufficient  difference 
between  upstream  and  downstream  water  levels  which  ensure 
free,  fully  ventilated  flow  under  conditions  of  maximum 
discharge. 

Broad-crested  weirs  may  be  used  with  relatively  smaller 
differences  in  water  level;  triangular-profile  weirs  and  standing- 
wave  flumes  may  be  used  with  even  smaller  differences  in 
water  level. 

For  all  types  of  weirs  and  flumes  included  in  this  International 
Standard,  the  discharge  should  be  free  or  independent  of  the 
downstream  water  level. 

A.3.2    Accuracy  of  measurement 

The  accuracy  in  a  single  determination  of  discharge  depends 
upon  the  estimation  of  the  component  uncertainties  involved 
but  approximate  ranges  of  uncertainties  for  the  weirs  and 
flumes  (at  95  %  confidence  levels)  are  as  follows  : 

—  rectangular  thin-plate  weirs  (full-width  and  notch)  1 
to  4  %; 


18 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO   4359  :  1983 


—  triangular-notch  weirs  (notch  angles  between  20°  and 
100°)  1  to  2  %; 

—  broad-crested  weirs  3  to  5  %; 

—  triangular-profile  weirs  2  to  5  %; 

—  standing-wave  flumes  2  to  5  %; 

—  free  overfall  5  to  10  %. 

Deviations  from  standard  construction,  installation  or  use  may 
result  in  larger  measurement  errors.  The  larger  figures  given 
above  are  recommended  conservative  values  for  use  under 
conditions  of  strict  conformance  with  standard  specifications. 
The  smallest  values  can  only  be  obtained  for  weirs  under 
rigorous  control,  such  as  may  be  built  and  installed  in  well- 
equipped  laboratories.  Under  field  conditions,  thin-plate  weirs 
are  specially  subject  to  errors  caused  by  natural  hazards. 

A. 3.3    Dimensions  and  shape  of  open  channel 

Rectangular  full-wictth  weirs  and  notch  weirs  (both  rectangular 
and  triangular)  of  large  size  relative  to  the  size  of  the  approach 
channel,  should  be  located  in  vertical-walled,  level-floored 
rectangular  channels,  or  in  weir  boxes  of  rectangular  cross- 
section  for  a  distance  extending  upstream  not  less  than  ten 
times  the  width  of  the  nappe  at  maximum  head.  For  thin-plate 
weirs  of  small  size  relative  to  the  size  of  the  approach  channel, 
especially  if  the  velocity  of  approach  is  negligible,  the  size  and 
shape  of  the  channel  is  of  no  importance. 

Broad-crested  weirs  are  best  used  in  rectangular  channels,  but 
they  can  be  used  with  good  accuracy  in  non-rectangular  chan- 
nels if  a  smooth,  rectangular  approach  channel  extends 
upstream  from  the  weir  by  a  distance  not  less  than  twice  the 
maximum  head. 

Flumes  can  be  used  in  channels  of  any  shape  if  flow  conditions 
in  the  approach  channel  are  reasonably  uniform  and  steady. 

For  weirs  and  flumes  of  all  types,  the  size  and  shape  of  the 
downstream  channel  are  of  no  significance  except  that  they 
must  permit  free,  fully  ventilated  flow  under  all  conditions  of 
use. 

A.3.4     Flow  conditions  in  the  approach  channel 

For  weirs  of  all  types,  flow  in  the  approach  channel  shall  be 
sub-critical,  uniform  and  steady.  Ideally,  especially  for  relatively 
high  velocities  of  approach,  the  velocity  distribution  should 
approximate  that  in  a  channel  of  sufficient  length  to  develop 
normal  (resistance-controlled)  flow  in  straight,  smooth  chan- 
nels. For  relatively  low  velocities  of  approach  and  for  flumes, 
flow  conditions  in  the  channel  are  of  less  importance.  In  short 
channels  and  weir  boxes,  baffles  and  flow-straighteners  may  be 
used  to  establish  a  normal  velocity  distribution.  Care  should  be 
taken  to  ensure  that  erosion  and/or  deposition  upstream  of  the 
weir  or  flume  do  not  significantly  alter  the  velocity  of  approach 
or  velocity  distribution  to  the  measurement  structure. 

Sub-critical  flow  is  ensured  when 


v  < 


ft 


where 

v    is  the  average  velocity,  in  metres  per  second,  in  the 
approach  channel; 

g     is  the  acceleration  due  to  gravity,  in  metres  per  second 
squared; 

A     is  the  cross-sectional  area,  in  square  metres,  of  the 
channel; 

Bs    is  the  width  of  the  channel,  in  metres,  at  the  water  sur- 
face. 

A. 3.5     Flow  with  sediment  load 

For  flows  with  suspended  load,  the  use  of  thin-plate  weirs 
should  be  avoided  because  the  crest  edge  may  be  damaged  or 
worn  by  the  suspended  materials. 

On  streams  with  bed  load,  the  use  of  measurement  structures 
which  significantly  reduce  the  stream  velocity  is  not  recom- 
mended as  it  may  result  in  changing  deposition  scour  depen- 
dent on  flow  regime.  Flumes  will  generally  perform  better  than 
weirs  on  streams  with  sediment  load. 

A.3.6    Flow  with  floating  debris 

Broad  crested  weirs,  triangular  profile  weirs,  standing  wave 
flumes  and  free  overfall  structures  will  normally  pass  floating 
debris  more  effectively  than  thin-plate  weirs.  The  use  of  the 
triangular-notch  (V-notch)  weir  in  particular  should  be  avoided 
unless  a  debris  trap  is  installed  upstream. 

A. 3.7    Magnitude  of  discharge  to  be  measured 

For  reasons  related  to  accuracy  and  construction,  thin-plate 
weirs  are  best  used  for  the  measurement  of  relatively  small 
discharges.  Broad-crested  weirs,  triangular-profile  weirs  and 
flumes  are  best  used  for  large  discharges. 

A. 3.8    Range  of  discharge  to  be  measured 

For  best  overall  accuracy  over  a  wide  range  of  small  discharges, 
a  triangular-notch  (V-notch)  weir  should  be  used  in  preference 
to  a  rectangular-notch  or  rectangular  full-width  weir.  For  a  wide 
range  of  larger  discharge,  a  trapezoidal-throat  or  U-throat 
flumes  should  be  used  in  preference  to  a  broad-crested  weir, 
free  overfall,  rectangular-throated  flume  or  a  triangular-profile 
weir. 

A.3.9    Construction 

Thin-plate  weirs  should  be  constructed  with  precision  tools 
under  machine-shop  conditions.  Flumes,  broad-crested  weirs, 
triangular-profile  weirs  and  free  overfalls  can  be  constructed 
satisfactorily  in  the  field.  In  all  cases,  great  care  must  be  exer- 
cised in  making  the  structures  conform  with  standard  specifica- 
tions. 

Broad-crested  weirs,  triangular-profile  weirs,  free  overfalls  and 
flumes  are  inherently  stronger  and  more  easily  maintained 
under  conditions  of  high  heads  in  large  channels. 


19 


IS  14869  :  2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


Annex  B 


Symbols  and  units 


Units  of  measurement  are  metres  (m>  and  seconds  Is)  or  derivatives  of  these. 


Symbol 

Quantity 

Unit  of 
measurement 

A 

area  of  cross-section  of  flow 

m2 

B 

width  of  approach  channel  (width  at  bed  if  trapezoidal) 

m 

b 

width  of  flume  throat  (width  at  bed  if  trapezoidal) 

m 

bv 

width  of  piers 

m 

C 

overall  coefficient  of  discharge  (rectangular  flumes) 

non-dimensional 

cc 

coefficient  of  contraction 

non-dimensional 

Co 

coefficient  of  discharge 

non-dimensional 

Cs 

shape  coefficient  for  trapezoidal  throated  flumes 

non-dimensional 

cu 

shape  coefficient  for  U-shaped  throated  flumes 

non-dimensional 

cv 

coefficient  allowing  for  the  effect  of  approach  velocity 

non-dimensional 

c, 

coefficient  of  discharge  for  channels 

non-dimensional 

D 

diameter  of  base  of  U-shaped  throated  flumes 

m 

d 

depth  of  flow 

m 

E 

specific  energy 

m 

e 

a  measure  of  the  excess  of  the  maximum  velocity  in  a  section  over  the  mean 

non-dimensional 

Fr 

Froude  number  =      

yfgd 

non-dimensional 

fyf-i.fy  etc. 

geometric  functions  depending  on  9 

non-dimensional 

8 

gravitational  acceleration 

m/s2 

H 

totaj  head 

m 

Hm 

correction  to  the  total  head 

m 

h 

gauged  head 

m 

j 

fraction  of  discharge 

non-dimensional 

*s 

equivalent  sand-roughness  of  surface,  after  Nikuradse 

m 

L 

length  of  prismatic  section  of  the  contraction  at  a  flume 

m 

Lb 

length  of  baffle  platform 

m 

^ 

length  of  bellmouth  entrance 

m 

L2 

length  of  glacis 

m 

h 

length  of  stilling  basin 

m 

m 

side-slope  (m  horizontal  to  1  vertical) 

non-dimensional 

20 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO    ,359:  15  .3 


Symbol 

Quantity 

Unit  of 
measurement 

n 

number  of  measurements  in  series 

non-dimensional 

% 

number  of  piers 

P 

wetted  perimeter  of  flow  cross-section 

m 

P 

height  of  flume  invert  above  the  invert  of  the  approach  channel 

m 

Q 

discharge 

m3/s 

R 

radius 

m 

Re 

Reynolds  number 

non-dimensional 

rP 

radius  of  hump 

m 

*i 

radius  of  bellmouth  entrance 

m 

V 

average  velocity  through  a  cross-section,  defined  by  QIA 

m/s 

w 

water  surface  width 

m 

X 

overall  uncertainty  in  the  determination  of  discharge  expressed  as  a  percentage  standard 

deviation  at  95  %  confidence  limits 

non-dimensional 

*k 

uncertainty  in  b  (or  D) 

non-dimensional 

*c 

uncertainty  in  the  combined  coefficient  value 

non-dimensional 

*h 

uncertainty  in  h 

non-dimensional 

x,„ 

uncertainty  in  m 

non-dimensional 

z 

index  of  d  in  formula  for  canal  discharge 

non-dimensional 

a 

coefficient  taking  into  account  non-uniformity  of  velocity  distribution 

non-dimensional 

0 

coefficient  dependent  on  mean  curvature  of  stream  lines 

non-dimensional 

y,  0.  w 

coefficients  in  the  error  equation 

-6, 

boundary  layer  displacement  thickness 

m 

n 

a  numerical  coefficient 

non-dimensional 

V 

kinematic  viscosity  of  the  fluid 

m2/s 

S 

standard  deviation 

- 

S 

standard  error  of  the  mean 

- 

8 

semi-angle  subtended  at  the  centre  of  curvature  of  the  invert  of  a  U-shaped  flume  by  the 

water  surface 

non-dimensional 

£b 

uncertainty  in  width  measurement 

m 

Eh 

uncertainty  in  head  measurement 

m 

Subscripts 

a 

values  in  approach  channel 

c 

values  at  critical  flow 

d 

values  downstream  of  the  flume 

e 

effective  values  after  making  allowance  for  boundary  layer  effects 

1 

values  assuming  an  ideal  frictionless  fluid 

max. 

the  maximum  value 

21 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359:1983 


Annex  C 


Velocity  distribution 


C.1  An  even  distribution  of  velocity  over  the  cross-section 
of  the  approach  channel  in  the  region  of  the  gauging  station  is 
necessary  for  high  accuracy  of  measurement  of  discharge  by 
means  of  weirs,  notches  and  flumes.  This  is  because  the 
recommended  coefficients  are  empirical  values  obtained  by 
various  investigators  and  were  usually  obtained  under  ideal 
laboratory  conditions.  These  involved  either  the  use  of  screens 
to  ensure  an  approximately  uniform  velocity  over  the  cross- 
section,  or  a  long  straight  approach  channel  conducive  to  the 
establishment  of  a  normal  distribution  of  velocities. 


C  .2  Normal  velocity  distribution  is  defined  as  the  distribution 
of  velocities  attained  in  a  channel  over  a  long  uniform  straight 
reach.  A  characteristic  feature  of  flow  in  such  a  channel  is  that 
the  velocity  is  a  maximum  at  about  0,6  depth  above  invert,  with 
the  average  velocity  occurring  at  about  0,4  depth  above  invert. 


and  12.7  in  mind,  figure  12  provides  some  guidance  to  the  type 
of  velocity  distribution  and  evenness  thereof  that  are  accep- 
table in  practice. 

C.4  In  figure  12  different  patterns  of  isovels  are  shown. 
These  isovels  are  contours  of  equal  velocity  in  the  direction  of 
flow. 


C.5  The  isovels  plotted  in  figures  12d),  e)  and  f)  provide 
examples  of  observed  normal  velocity  distributions,  which  are 
clearly  acceptable.  Figure  12a)  shows  some  skewness,  but 
nevertheless  approximates  to  a  normal  distribution. 
Figures  12b)  and  12c)  show  appreciable  departure  from  unifor- 
mity, and  are  considered  representative  of  the  maximum  accep- 
table departure  from  ideal  approach  conditions  for  the  uncer- 
tainties given. 


C.3  Any  deviation  from  the  ideal  conditions  of  either  very 
uniform  velocity  or  a  normal  velocity  distribution  may  lead  to 
errors  in  flow  measurement,  but  quantitative  information  on 
the  influence  of  velocity  distribution  is  inadequate  to  define  the 
acceptable  limits  of  departure  from  the  ideal  distribution.  With 
the  uncertainties  on  discharge  coefficients  quoted  in  10.7,  11 .8 


C.6  If  approach  conditions  are  unfavourable,  strong  secon- 
dary currents  {spiral  flow)  may  occur.  Even  though  an  isovel 
diagram  showing  forward  components  may  appear  reasonable 
in  such  circumstances,  the  presence  of  significant  cross  com- 
ponents of  velocity  would  make  such  an  installation  unaccep- 
table. 


22 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


Annex  D 


Computation  of  discharge  using  boundary  layer  theory 


D.I     General 

Boundary  layer  theory  can  be  used  to  determine  the  variations 
of  the  notional  displacement  of  the  flow  boundaries,  St,  and 
hence  it  is  possible  to  use  the  more  generalised  expressions  for 
CD  given  in  equations  (24),  (30).  and  (45). 


D.2     Rectangular  throated  flume 

D.2.1     The  generalised  expression  for  CD,  see  equation  (24), 
is  : 


c)  Obtain  the  value  of  Cv  from  figure  6  assuming  <5#  =  0 
and  Cv  =1,0. 

d)  Make  an  approximation  to  Q  using  equation  (20)  and 
assuming  CD  =  1,00. 

e)  Use  equation  (72)  to  obtain  the  Reynolds  number  Re. 

f >     Work  out  L/ks  and  find  5JL  from  figure  13;  hence  St. 

g)     Use  equation  (71)  to  compute  CD  and  recompute  Q 
using  equation  (20). 


Cn 


3  L 


5         L^'2 

1 x 

L        h 


(71 )  D.2.6     Following  the  first  approximation  (in  D.2.5)  further  ap- 

proximations use  steps  c)  to  g)  of  D.2.5  as  follows  : 


D.2.2  The  coefficient  of  discharge  may  be  evaluated  by 
equation  (71 )  using  the  geometrical  measurements  of  the 
structure,  provided  the  boundary  layer  displacement  thickness 
5^  can  be  estimated.  The  relative  boundary  layer  displacement 
thickness  6JL  may  be  evaluated  approximately  from  figure  13. 
In  using  this  figure,  certain  simplifying  assumptions  are  made  : 

a)  The  boundary  layer  is  assumed  to  originate  at  the 
leading  edge  of  the  prismatic  portion  of  the  throat. 

b)  Transition  from  laminar  to  turbulent  boundary  layer  is 
assumed  to  take  place  at  a  Reynolds  number 

Re  =  3  x  105. 

c)  The    control    section    is    presumed    to    be    at    the 
downstream  end  of  the  prismatic  throat  section. 

D.2.3  The  value  of  ks,  the  equivalent  sand  grain  roughness 
of  the  throat,  may  be  selected  from  table  4  for  a  range  of  con- 
struction materials.  From  this,  the  ratio  Lfks  may  be  com- 
puted. 

D.2.4  The  value  of  6JL  is  insensitive  to  Re,  but  Re  is  depen- 
dent upon  the  discharge  as  follows  : 


Re  =  ± 

v 


gQ^m 
b 


(72) 


Values  of  v,  the  kinematic  viscosity  of  water,  are  given  in 
table  5. 


D.2.5  The  computation  of  discharge  to  the  first  approxima- 
tion for  a  given  head  acting  on  a  rectangular  throated  flume  of 
known  geometry  is  thus  made  as  follows  : 

a)  List  the  values  of  b,  B,  p,  L,  g  and  ks. 

b)  Compute  the  area  of  the  approach  channel  cross- 
section  using  equation  (17). 


c)  Repeat    using    value    of    J#    obtained    in    f)    and 
equations  (22)  and  (23)  to  determine  be  hB. 

d)  Repeat    using    value    of    St    obtained    in    f)    and 
equations  (21),  (22)  and  (23)  to  determine  C0. 

e)  to  g)     Repeat  as  above. 


D.3    Trapezoidal  throated  flumes 

D.3.1     The  generalised  expression  for  CD,  see  equation  (30), 
is  : 


CD=    11  -2,  r 


S         L  V/2 


.  .  (73) 


D.3. 2  The  coefficient  of  discharge  may  be  evaluated  from 
equation  (73),  using  the  geometrical  measurements  of  the 
structure.  The  relative  boundary  layer  displacement  SJL  may 
be  estimated  from  figure  13  (see  D.2.2  for  the  simplifying 
assumptions  implicit  in  figure  13). 

D.3. 3  The  value  of  ks,  the  equivalent  sand  roughness  of  the 
throat,  may  be  selected  from  table  4  for  a  range  of  construction 
materials.  From  this  the  ratio  L/ks  may  be  computed. 

D.3. 4  The  value  of  6JL  is  not  very  sensitive  to  Re,  but  this  is 
dependent  on  the  discharge,  as  follows  : 


v    \    b 


8Q 


1/3 


1/3 


.  .  .  (74) 


Values  of  v  for  water  are  given  in  table  5.  The  ratio  wc/b  is  a 
function  of  mHJb,  and,  making  the  approximation  h  =  Hcfor 
the  purpose,  may  be  read  from  figure  8. 


23 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


D.3.5  The  computation  of  discharge  for  a  given  head  acting 
on  a  trapezoidal  throated  flume  of  known  geometry  is  thus 
made  as  follows  : 

a)  List  the  values  of  m,  rnR,  b,  B,  p,  L,  g,  v  and  ks. 

b)  Compute  the  area   of  the  approach   channel  cross- 
section.  If  it  is  of  trapezoidal  shape,  use  equation  (18). 

c)  As  a  first  approximation,  assume  mH    lb    ~  mhlb 
and  obtain  Cs  from  figure  8  for  the  given  value  of  h. 

d)  Obtain    a    first   approximation    of    Cv   from   figure  6 
assuming  St  =  0. 

e)  Obtain  wjb  from  figure  14.  As  a  first  approximation, 
enter  the  diagram  at  the  value  of  mhlb. 

f)  Make  an  approximation  to  Q  using  equation  (29)  with 
the  above  values  of  Cv,  Cs  and  assuming  CD  =  1,00. 

g)  Use  equation  (74)  to  obtain  the  Reynolds  number,  Re. 
h)     Work  out  L/ks  and  find  6JL  from  figure  13;  hence  3f. 


j)     tj  -  a/(1   +  m2)  -  m,  or  obtain  from  figure  7. 

k)     Use  equation  (73)  to  compute  CD,  and  recompute  Q 
(equation  29)  using  this  value. 


D.3.6  This  completes  the  first  approximation.  These  values 
of  C,  Cv,  CD  and  Q  are  utilized  in  beginning  the  second  approx- 
imation as  follows  ; 


a)  mHce/be  is  obtained  from  equation  (32), 

b)  Figure  8  is  used  with  the  above  to  obtain  a  close 
approximation  of  C  . 

c)  Cs  be  hJA  can  now  be  worked  out,  and  a  new  value  of 
Cv  obtained  from  figure  6. 

d)  The  value  of  CD,  together  with  the  revised  values  of -Cv 
and  C  ,  shall  then  be  inserted  in  equation  (29)  to  obtain  a 
more  accurate  figure  for  Q. 


D.4.2  The  coefficient  of  discharge  CQ  may  be  evaluated  by 
equation  (75),  using  the  geometrical  measurements  of  the 
structure.  It  is  first  necessary  to  evaluate  the  relative  boundary 
layer  displacement  dJL.  This  may  be  estimated  from  figure  13 
(see  D.2.2  for  the  simplifying  assumptions  implicit  in  figure  13) 
where  it  is  expressed  as  a  function  of  relative  roughness  Llk 
and  Reynolds  number  Re. 

D.4.3  The  value  of  ks,  the, equivalent  sand  roughness  of  the 
throat,  may  be  selected  from  table  4  for  a  range  of  construction 
materials,  from  this  and  the  throat  length,  L,  the  ratio  Llk 
may  be  computed. 

D.4.4     The  value  of  3IL  is  not  very  sensitive  to  Reynolds 
number,  but  Re  is  dependent  on  the  discharge,  as  follows  : 


Re  = 


sQ\m(jL\m 


(76) 


An  alternative  expression  in  terms  of  the  gauged  head,  h,  is 
more  convenient  : 


Re 


-w- 


gh  <cv  cu  CD) 


1/3 


D 


1/3 


(77) 


The  first  approximations  to  Cu  and  Cv  obtained  as  suggested  in 
12.4.3  and  12.4.4,  and  the  assumption  CD  =  1,  may  be  utilized 
in  evaluating  equation  (77). 

Values  of  wJD  are  shown  in  figure  15  against  HJD.  In 
reading  off  the  value  of  wJD  to  insert  in  equation  (77),  the  ap- 
proximation h  =  Hc  may  be  made. 

D.4.5  The  computation  of  discharge  for  a  given  head  acting 
on  a  U-shaped  flume  of  known  geometry  thus  proceeds  as 
follows  : 

a)  List  the  values  of  D,  L,  Da,  p,  ks  and  v. 

b)  Compute  the  area  of  the  approach  channel  cross- 
section;  if  it  is  of  U-shape,  use  equation  (19). 

c)  As  a  first  approximation,  assume  Hce/De  =  hID  and 
obtain  Cu  from  figure  10  for  the  given  value  of  h. 

d)  Obtain   a   first   approximation   of   Cv   from   figure  6, 
assuming  5    =  0. 


D.3.7  Steps  a)  to  d)  shall  be  repeated  until  sufficient  pre- 
cision has  been. obtained  in  the  values  of  Cs,  Cv  and  Cn.  As  CD 
is  relatively  insensitive  to  Re,  it  is  seldom  necessary  to  go 
beyond  the  first  approximation  to  Re,  but  third  or  fourth  ap- 
plications of  steps  a)  to  c)  may  be  necessary. 


D.4     U-throated  (round-bottomed)  flumes 


e)  Evaluate  -JOghlT),  Llv,  and  L/ks. 

f)  Obtain   wJD  from  figure  15,   again   using  as  a  first 
approximation  HJD  =  hID. 

g)  Estimate  Reynolds  number  from  equation  (77),  assum- 
ing C0  =  1,0. 

h)     Read  from  figure  13  the  value  of  6JL  corresponding  to 
these  values  of  Llk„  and  Re. 


D.4.1     The  generalised  expression  for  CD,  see  equation  (45), 
is  : 


d  L\    f        6  L\3'2 


C0-    V~2I*D      V-L*i; 


(75) 


j)  Evaluate  LID  and  Llh  and  compute  CD  from 
equation  (75). 

k)  Hce  can  be  estimated  from  equation  (47)  using  -the 
avove  values  of  h,  SJL,  L  and  Cv.  De  is  obtained  from 
D.  =  D  -  26  and  h.  is  obtained  from  A    =  h  -  5  . 


24 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO   4359:1983 


D.4.6     This  completes  the  first  approximation.  These  values  D.4.7     Steps  a)  to  c)  shall  be  repeated  until  sufficient  pre- 

of  Hce,  Cv  and  CD  are  utilized  in  beginning  the  second  approxi-  cision  has  been  obtained  in  the  values  of  Cu  and  Cv.  As  SJL  is 

mation,  as  follows  :  relatively  insensitive  to  Re,  it  is  not  usually  necessary  to  go 

beyond  the  first  approximation  to  Re,  but  third  or  fourth 

a)  Evaluate  HJDe  and  obtain  a  revised  value  of  Cu  from  applications  of  steps  a)  to  c)  may  be  necessary, 
figure  10. 

b)  Evaluate  Cu  De  hJA  and  obtain  a  revised  value  of  Cv 
from  figure  6. 

c)  Obtain  a  revised  estimate  of  Hce  from  equation  (47),  us-  D.4.8     Discharge  is  then  computed  from  equation  (44)  for  the 
ing  the  revised  value  of  Cv.  given  head. 


25 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


Annex  E 


Examples  illustrating  methods  for  the  computation  of  discharge 


E.1     Calculation  of  single  discharge  for  a  trapezoidal  throated  flume 

y  =  0,003 


E.1.1 


m  -  ma  =  1,00 
b  =  0,50  m 
B  =  2,00  m 


p  =  0,15  m 
L  =  3,00  m 


g  =  9,81  m/s2 
h  =  1,00  m 


E.1.2     Using  the  method  described  in  11.4,  the  calculation  proceeds  as  follows  : 


Parameter 

Approximation 

Equation 

or  figure 

used 

first 

second 

third 

Area  of  approach  channel, 
A  (m2) 

Numerical  coefficient,  rj 

Coefficient  of  discharge,  Cq 

mNce/be 

Shape  coefficient,  Cs 

Cs  be  he/A 

Coefficient  of  velocity,  Cv 

Discharge,  Q  (m3/s) 

3,968 
0,414  2 
0,971  8 
2,000 
2,435 
0,306  9 
1,023 
,2,062 

2,030 
2,445 
0,308  1 
1,023 
2,072 

2,031 
2,450 
0,308  8 
1,023 
2,076 

Equation  18 

Figure  7 
Equation  31 

Figure  8 

Figure  6 
Equation  29 

E.2    Calculation  of  single  discharge  for  a  trapezoidal  throated  flume;  boundary  layer  corrections 


E.2.1 


m  =  ma  =  1,00               p  =  0,15  m 
b  =  0,50  m                      L  =  3,00  m 
B  =  2,00  m                      g  =  9,81  m/s2 

v  =  1,141   x  10-6m2/s 
*8  =  0,001  5  m 
h  =  1,00  m 

Using  the  method  described  in  annex  D 

the  calculation  proceeds  as  follows  : 

Parameter 

Approximation 

Equation 

or  figure 

used 

first 

second 

third 

Area  of  approach  channel, 
A  (m2) 

mHcslbe 

3,968 
2,000 

2,030 

2,031 

Equation  18 

Shape  coefficient,  Cs 

2,435 

2,445 

2,450 

Figure  8 

Cs  be  he/A 

0,306  9 

0,308  1 

0,308  8 

— 

Coefficient  of  velocity,  Cv 

1,023 

1,023 

1,023 

Figure  6 

wclb 

Discharge,  Q  (m3/s) 

4,1 
2,123 

2,029 

2,033 

Figure  14 
Equation  29 

Reynolds  number.  Re 

5,69  x  106 

- 

- 

Equation  74 

SJL 

0,005  2 

- 

- 

Figure  13 

6.  (m> 

0,015  6 

- 

- 

— 

Numerical  coefficient,  rj 

0,414  2 

- 

- 

Figure  7 

Coefficient  of  discharge,  CD 

0,951  5 

- 

- 

Equation  73        I 

Discharge,  Q  (m^/s) 

2,019 

- 

- 

Equation  29        | 

26 


E.3    Calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  trapezoidal  flume 

6  IL  =  0,003 


E.3.1 


m  =  ma  =  1,00 
b  =  0,50  m 


B  =  2,00  m 

p  =  0,15  m 


L  =  3,00  m 
g  =  9,81  m/s2 


E.3.2    Example  of  calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  a  trapezoidal-throated  flume  when  5JL  =  0,003. 


Variables 

<*c 

wc 

Pc 

*c 

Q 

»e 

H, 

H 

"al 

*1 

va2 

»2 

"a3 

''3 

How 
obtained 

Input 

Equation 
(34) 

Equation 
(37) 

Equation 
(35) 

Equation 
(13) 

Equation 
(14) 

Equation 

(36) 

w.  +  'V 

Equation 
(39) 
and 

''"ai  =  Q'Aal 
with 

h  =  H 

Equation 

(38) 
'^  =  ^a1> 

Equation 
(39) 
and 

'a2  =  Q'** 
with 

h  =  /i, 

Equation 

(381 
<va  =  ^2> 

Equation 
(39) 

and 

va\    =  QiAa3 
with 

h  =  h2 

Equation 

(381 

<va1  =  va2] 

m 

m 

m 

m2 

m3/s 

m 

m 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

m's 

m 

Results 

0,10 

0,700 

0,783 

0,060 

0,055 

0,142  8 

0,0)0  1 

0, 152  9 

0,078  9 

0, 152  6 

0,078  9 

0,152  6 
0,287  1 
0,544  7 
0.794  8 

0,078  9 
0,162  4 
0,356  8 
0,462  9 

0,152  6 
0,287  1 

0,20 

0,900 

1.066 

0,140 

0,173 

0.277  8 

0,010  6 

0,288  4 

0,161  8 

0,287  1 

0,162  4 

0,40 

1,300 

1,631 

0,360 

0,593 

0.538  5 

0,011  3 

0,549  8 

0,313  9 

0,544  8 

0,316  7 

0,544  7 
0,794  8 

0,60 

1,700 

2,197 

0,660 

1,288 

0,794  1 

0,011  6 

0,805  7 

0,456  0 

0,795  1 

0,462  7 

0,80 

2,100 

2,763 

1,040 

2,292 

1,047  6 

0,011  8 

1,059  4 

0,590  5 

1,041  6 

0,602  7 

1,040  9 
1,284  1 

0,603  2 
0,738  9 

1,040  9 
1,284  1 

1,00 

2,500 

3,328 

1,500 

3,639 

1,300  0 

0,011  9 

1,311  9 

0,719  0 

1,285  6 

0,737  8 

1,50 

3,500 

4.743 

3,000 

8,699 

1,928  6 

0,012  2 

1,940  8 

1,017  1 

1,888  1 

1,057  0 

1,883  9 
2,474  6 

1,060  3 

1,883  5 

2,00 

4,500 

6,157 

5,000 

16,508 

2,555  6 

0,012  3 

2,567  9 

1,287  5 

2,483  4 

1,352  9 

1,360  0 

2,473  6 

E.4    Calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  trapezoidal  throated  flume;  boundary  layer  corrections 


E.4.1 


m  =  ma  =  1,00 
b  =  0,50  m 
B  =  2,00  m 


p  =  0,15  m 
L  =  3,00  m 
g  =  9,81  m/s2 


v  =  1,141   x   10 
At    =  0,001  5 


"6m2/E 


E.4.2    Example  of  calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  a  trapezoidal-throated  flume  with  boundary  layer  corrections. 


S 


Variables 

"e 

wc 

Pc 

■"c 

Q 

"e 

Re 

S.IL 

H, 

H 

"al 

*1 

"a2 

h2 

7a3 

"3 

How 
obtained 

Input 

Equation 

(34) 

Equation 
(37) 

Equation 
(35) 

Equation 
(13) 

Equation 
(14) 

Equation 
(74) 

Figure 

13 
{L/ks  = 
2  000) 

Equation 
(36) 

(«.  +  He) 

Equation 
(39) 
and 

Va\  =  Q>Aa1 
with 

/!  =  « 

Equation 

(38) 
'^  =  ^l' 

Equation 
(39) 
and 

^2  =  t?'',a2 
with 

h  =  ."1 

Equation 

(38) 
<*a  =  "a2> 

Equation 
(39) 
and 

*a3  -  V'"'a3 
with 

h  =  h2 

Equation 

(38) 
'^a  =  ^a2» 

Results 

m 

m 

m 

m2 

m3/s 

m 

m 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

0,20 

0,900 

1,066 

0,140 

0,173 

0,277  8 

3,25  x   10s 

0,005  0 

0,017  7 

0,295  5 

0,1588 

0,294  2 

0,159  3 

0,294  3 

0,159  3 

0,294  3 

0,60 

1,700 

2,197 

0,660 

1,288 

0,794  1 

5,13  x   106 

0,005  1 

0,019  8 

0,813  9  j 

0,450  8 

0,803  5 

0,457  4 

0,803  2 

0,457  6 
0,732  0 

0,803  2 
1,293  5 

1,00 

2,500 

3,328 

1,500 

3,639 

1,3000 

6,38  x   10^ 

0,005  2 

0,020  8 

1,320  8 

0,712  9 

1,294  9 

0,731  1 

1,293  6 

1,50 

3.500 

4,743 

3,000 

8,699 

1,928  6 

7,62  x   10s 

0,005  2 

0.021  1      ' 

1,949  7 

1,010  6 

1,897  6 

1,849  6 
1,345  0 

1,893  6 
2,484  7 

1,052  7 
1,351  9 

1,893  2 
2,483  7 

2,00 

4.500 

6,157 

5,000 

16,508 

2,555  6 

8,68  x   106 

0,005  2 

0,021  3 

2,576  9 

1,280  7 

2,493  3 

to  to 


CO 
0> 
IO 

IO 

o 
o 
o 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO   4359:  1983 


E.5    Calculation  of  single  discharge  for  a  U-throated  flume;  SJL  =  0,003 


E.5.1     D  =  0,40  m 
L  =  1,00  m 


Da  =  0,60  m 
P  =  0,0 


g  =  9,81  m/s2 
h  =  0,25  m 


E.5. 2     Using  the  method  described  in  12.4,  the  calculation  proceeds  as  follows  : 


Parameter 

Approximation 

Equation 

or  figure 

used 

first 

second 

third 

Area  of  approach  channel, 
A  \m2) 

Hce/De 

Shape  coefficient,  Cu 

Cu  D  hi  A 

Coefficient  of  velocity,  Cv 

Coefficient  of  discharge,  Cq 

Effective  total  head, 
Hce  (m) 

Discharge,  Q  (m3/s) 

0,111  5 
0,625  0 
0,754 
0,676  2 
1,133 
0,967  3 

0,271  7 

0,679  3 
0,776 
0,695  9 

1,144 

0,273  4 

0,683  4 
0,777 
0,696  8 

1,144 

0,273  4 
0,073  6 

Equation  49 

Figure  10 

Figure  6 
Equation  46 

Equation  48 
Equation  44 

E,6    Calculation  of  single  discharge  for  a  U-throated  flume;  boundary  layer  corrections 


E.6.1 


D  =  0,40  m 
L  =  1,00  m 
Da  =  0,60  m 


P  =  0,0 

g  =  9,81  m/s2 

v  =  1,141   x  10" 


i2/s 


Ars  =  0,000  6  m 
h  =  0,25  m 


E.6.2     Using  the  method  described  in  annex  D,  the  calculation  proceeds  as  follows  : 


Parameter 

Approximation 

Equation 

or  figure 

used 

first 

second 

third 

Area  of  approach  channel, 
A  (m2) 

0,111  5 

_ 



Equation  19 

Wce/£>e 

0,625  0 

0,682  5 

0,680  5 

— 

Shape  coefficient,  Cu 

0,754 

0,778 

0,778 

Figure  10 

Cu  D  hi  A 

0,676  2 

0,697  8 

0,697  8 

- 

Coefficient  of  velocity,  Cv 

1,133 

1,145 

1,145 

Figure  6 

wc/^ 

0,993 

- 

- 

Figure  15 

Reynolds  number.  Re 

1,06  x  106 

- 

- 

Equation  77 

6JL 

0,004  7 

- 

- 

Figure  13 

6.  (m) 

0,004  7 

- 

- 

— 

Coefficient  of  discharge,  CD 

0,949  1 

- 

- 

Equation  75 

Effective  total  head, 
Hce  (m) 

0,266  6 

0,268  5 

0,268  5 

Equation  47 

Discharge,  Q  <m3/s) 

- 

- 

0,072  07 

Equation  44 

28 


E.7    Calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  a  U-shape  throated  flume 

8  IL  =  0,003 


E.7.1 


D  =  0,40  m 
L  =  1,00  m 


D„ 


=  0,60  m 
0,0 


g  =  9,81  m/s2 


E.7.2     Example  of  calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  a  U-throated  flume  when  6JL  =  0,003 


I     Variables 

throat 

<>c 

"c 

Pc 

\ 

Q 

"e 

H, 

H 

"a1 

*1 

va2 

h2 

va3           j           h3 

How 
obtained 

Input 

Equation 

(52) 

(or 

input) 

Equation 

(53) 
or  (06) 

Equation 

(58! 
or  (59) 

Equation 

(54) 
or  (56) 

Equation 
(131 

Equation 
(14) 

Equation 
(57) 

(He  +  HJ 

Equation 

(61)  or  (62) 

and 

*>l  =  Ql**\ 
with 
h  =  H 

Equation 

(60) 
(va  =  va1> 

Equation 

(61)  or  (62) 

and 

Ta2  =  QlAa2 
with 

Equation 
(60) 

Equation 

(61)  or  (62) 

and 

^3  =  Q/Aa3 
with 
h  =  h2 

Equation 

(60) 
^  =  ''as' 

Results 

rad 

m 

to 

m 

m 

rrP/s 

m 

m 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

1,00 

0,091  9 

0,336  6 

0,400  0 

0.021  8 

0,617  4 

0,124  3 

0,003  6 

0,127  9 

0,394  6 

0,120  0 

0,431  8 

0,118  4 

0,440  5 

0,118  0 

1,30 

0,146  5 

0,386  4 

0.520  0 

0,041  7 

0,043  0 

0,200  6 

0,004  0 

0,204  6 

0,505  3- 

0,191  6 

0,552  7 

0,189  0 

0,563  6 

0,188  4 

7t/2 

0,200  0 

0.400  8 

0.628  6 

0,062  8 

0,077  9 

0,278  5 

0,004  7 

0,283  2 

0,593  3 

0,265  3 

0,645  9 

0,261  9 

0,656  8 

0,261  2 

0,250  0 

0.400  0 

0,728  3 

0,082  8 

0,118  0 

0,353  3 

0,005  5 

0,359  0 

0,667  4 

0,336  3 

0,723  0 

0,332  4 

0,733  8 

0,331  6 

0,300  0 

0,400  0 

0,828  3 

0,102  8 

0,163  2 

0,428  5 

0,006  2 

0.434  7 

0,734  5 

0,407  2 

0,793  4 

0,402  6 

0,803  9 

0,401  8 

0,400  0 

0,400  0 

1,028  3 

0,142  8 

0,267  2 

0,578  5 

0,007  7 

0,586  2 

0,853  4 

0,  549  1 

0,918  5 

0,543  2 

0,930  0 

0,542  1 

E.8    Calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  a  U-throated  flume;  boundary  layer  corrections 


E.8.1 


D  =  0,40  m 
L  =  1,00  m 
D,  =  0,60  m 


P  =  0,0 

g  =  9,81  m/s 


v  =  1,141   x  10"6m2/s 
k„  =  0,000  6  m 


s 


E.8.2     Example  of  calculation  of  stage-discharge  curve  for  a  U-throated  flume  with  boundary  layer  correction. 


Variables 

^throat 

"c 

wc 

P. 

\ 

Q 

"e 

Re 

SJL 

W, 

H 

>'a1 

h\ 

"a2 

hz 

_va3 

H 

How 
obtained 

Input 

Equation 

(52) 

(or 

input) 

Equation 

(53) 
or  (55) 

Equation 

(58) 
or  (59) 

Equation 

(54) 
or  (561 

Equation 

(13) 

Equation 

(14) 

Equation 
(76) 

Figure 
13 

(/,/*  = 
1  667) 

Equation 
(57) 

{He  +  //,) 

Equation 

161  lor  (62) 
and  Vg]  = 

<?/<4ai 
with 

h  =  H 

Equation 

(60) 
I"va  =  'l'a1» 

Equation 
(61  lor  (62) 
and  Va2  = 

with 

Equation 
160) 

<»»  =  va2> 

Equation 
(61 1  or  (62) 
and  Va3  = 

Q'A33 
with 

h  =  h2 

Equation 

(60) 
{Va  =  Fa3> 

Results 

rad 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m3/s 

m 

m 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

m/s 

m 

1,00 

0,0919 

0,336  6 

0,400  0 

0,021  8 

0,017  4 

0,124  3 

6,99  x  105 

0,004  0 

0,004  8 

0,129  1 

0,389  3 

0,121  4 

0,425  1 

0,119  9 

0,432  7 

0,119  6 

nil 

0,200  0 

0,400  0 

0,628  3 

0,062  8 

0,077  9 

0,278  5 

1,09  x  106 

0,004  7 

0,007  4 

0,285  9 

0,586  2 

0,268  4 

0,635  9 

0,265  3 

0,645  9 

0,264  6 

- 

0,300  0 

0,400  0 

0,828  3 

0,102  8 

0,163  2 

0,428  5 

1,39  x  106 

0,005  0 

0,010  4 

0,438  9 

0,726  3 

0,412  0 

0,782  4 

0,407  7 

0,792  2 

0,406  9 

- 

0,400  0 

0,100  0 

1,028  3 

0,142  8 

0,267  2 

0,578  5 

1,64  x  106 

0,005  2 

0,013  4 

0,591  9 

0,844  2 

0.555  6 

0,906  4 

0,550  0 

0,917  0 

0,549  0 

wSS 


(O 


<o 


So 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:1983 


Annex  F 

Example  of  the  computation  of  the  overall  uncertainty 
of  discharge  measurement 


F.1  The  following  is  an  example  of  the  application  of  the 
uncertainty  formula.  In  each  case  the  component  uncertainties 
[Xc;  Xb;  Xh  and  Xm)  may  be  taken  as  percentage  standard 
deviations  at  the  95  %  confidence  level.  The  total  uncertainty 
X  therefore  is  found  with  95  %  confidence.  It  is  assumed  in  the 
example  that  the  head  is  measured  by  digital  punched  tape 
recorder  having  a  resolution  of  1  mm  with  an  uncertainty  of 
±  3  mm  (sh).  The  zero  is  measured  in  each  case  to  +  1  mm 
(ez). 

It  is  assumed  in  the  example  that  a  series  of  readings  of  a  cons- 
tant head  produced  a  standard  deviation  of  the  mean  of 
1,5  mm. 

F.2  Rectangular  throated  flume  with  a  throat  width  b  of 
1,0  m,  approach  channel  width  B  of  2,0  m,  hump  height  p  of 
0,25  m  and  a  throat  length  L  of  3,0  m.  The  uncertainty  in  width 
may  be  taken  as  ±  2  mm. 


F.3     The  overall  uncertainty  in  discharge  at  a  given  head,  say 
1,00  m,  is  calculated  as  follows  : 


h 

=  1,00  m 

b/B 

=  0,5 

h/(h 

+  p)  =  0,80 

cv 

=  "1,039,  from  table  2 

hIL 

=  0,33 

Lib 

=  3,0 

Cn 

=  0,968,  from  table  1 

Hence 


*h  = 

xb  = 


±  2,4  %  using  equation  (28) 

±  0,44  %  using  equation  (70) 

+  0,2  %  using  equation  (69) 


X     =   ±  (2,42  +  0,22  +  1,52  x  0,442)1/2 
=   +  2,5  % 


30 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


Annex  G 
Determination  of  height  of  hump  —  Rectangular  throated  flumes 


G.1     Stage-discharge  relation 

The  stage-discharge  relation  of  a  channel  or  distributory  is 
given  by 


where 

Q    is  the  discharge; 

C|     is  a  coefficient; 

d    is  the  central  depth  of  water  in  the  channel; 

z    is  the  index  which  varies  between  1,5  and  2,0. 
Values  of  z  are  summarised  below  : 


(78) 


Series 
number 

Shape  of  channel 

Z 

1 
2 

3 

4 

Rectangular 
Trapezoidal 

Unlined  channels  with 
design  side  slopes  1/2  to 
1 

Lined  channels  with 
slopes  1 ,5  to  1 

1,5 

Variable  and  increases 
with  the  flatness  of  the 
side  slope 

1,6  to  1,7 
1,9  to  2,0 

As  compared  to  the  above  equation,  the  discharge  in  the  case 
of  a  broad  crested  weir  is  proportional  to  i/1,5  and  also  to  /i15 
where  //and  h  are  the  total  and  gauged  heads  respectively.  As 
the  exponent  of  d\  is  greater  than  the  exponent  of  h,  there  will 
be  draw-down  at  low  flows  and  ponding  at  high  flows  provided 
the  sill  of  the  throat  is  at  the  same  level  of  the  channel  bed. 
Draw-down  could  result  in  scour  and  ponding  in  silting.  This 
can  be  avoided  by  providing  a  hump  in  the  flume  throat.  The 
height  of  hump  "p"  required  to  give  proportionality  i.e.  rate  of 
change  in  "dg"  equal  to  the  rate  of  change  in  "h"  at  a  particular 
discharge  thus  ensuring  absence  of  either  draw-down  or 
ponding  is  worked  out  below. 

G.1.1  Proportionality  for  a  small  variation  from  a 
particular  discharge 


Q  =  C,  d\    (for  channel) 
=  CDli1'5    (for  flume) 


•  .  (79) 
.  .(80) 


Since  the  rate  of  change  of  discharge  in  the  approach  channel 
(da  in  channel)  is  equal  to  the  rate  of  change  over  the  flume  (A 
in  flume) 


substituting  C,  and  CD  from  equations  (79)  and  (80)  into  (81 ) 

.  .  .  (82) 

...  (83) 

...  (84) 

.  .  .  (85) 
...  (86) 

.  .  .  (87) 

...  (88) 

...  (89) 
...  (90) 


zVxdi 

-1  =  1,5-2- 

/,1.5 

X    /I0-5 

simplifying 

z        3         1 
da        2    *    h 

hence 

3 

h=2X 

4j 

Z 

Similarly  any 

fraction  of  discharge  say 

JQ  =  c, 

"il 

JC,  d\  = 

C.dlj 

Hence 

c/ay1/c  =  daJ    for  channel 
on  the  same  lines 


hj  =  h  x  J2'3 


Therefore  height  of  hump 


P  =  dj-  hJ 


=  rf,/'*  -  W2/3 
Substituting  value  of  h  from  equation  (84)  into  equation  (90) 
Height  of  hump  : 


3       da 
dJVz  -  -r  x  —  x  /2/3 
a  2        z 


p-rf.(/"-fxT 


(91) 


(92) 


zC,rfj~1  =  1,5CD  x  h05 


.  .  (81) 


Figure  16  gives  the  height  of  hump  required  to  give  propor- 
tionality at  a  particular  value  of  J. 


G.1.2    For  bulk  proportionality 

Where  channels  are  run  with  fluctuating  discharge,  the  propor- 
tionality is  not  obtainable  for  the  whole  range  and  it  is  then 
desirable  to  design  the  hump  such  that  error  over  the  range  of- 
discharges  chosen  will  be  minimum.  This  is  called  the  "bulk 


31 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


proportionality"  and  in  this  case  the  height  of  hump  required  to  Height  of  humo  ■ 

below  proportionalitV  for  Qi  *o  Q2  is  evaluated  as  given  9  P  ' 


2i  =  ci  dh  =  cD  a;-s 


and 


Qi  =  JQi  =  c,  di2  =  cD  Ai.s 


Therefore 
d 


1  T 


For  bulk  proportionality 

rfai  -  ^2  =  *i  -  A2 
Hence 

1 


1 


yi/*   *  rfa2  -  da2  =  —  x  A2  -  h2 
Therefore 


/"■:      j       \j2/3 


Hence 


h2  = 


.  (93) 


.  (94) 


(95) 


(96) 


(97) 


.  (98) 


(99) 


P  =  da2-  h2 


Substituting  value  of  h2  from  equation  (99) 
Height  of  hump  : 


P  =  da2~  da2 


^'\ 


/2/3 


=  d. 


a2 


1    - 


1 


y2/3 


-1 


Substituting  dg2  by  d^  and  J,  from  equation  (95) 
Height  of  hump  : 


P  =  c/al  ji/« 


71/^ 


y2/3 


-i 


J 


(100) 


.  .  .  (101) 


•  •  •  (102) 


rfrlTnJVT  the  hei9ht  °f  ^^  TeqUired  f°r  V9riOUS  Val^ 

of  z  and  fluctuations  in  discharges  i.e.  J. 


32 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


Table  1  —  Discharge  coefficients  for  rectangular  throated  flumes 


cD  = 


1  - 


0,006  L 


1  - 


0,003  L\  3/2 


L 

b 

h 
L 

0,70 

0,65 

0,60 

0,55 

0,50 

0,45 

0,40 

13,35 

0,30 

0,25 

0,20 

0,15 

0,10 

0,05 

0,2 

0,992  4 

0,991  9 

0,991  3 

0,990  6 

0,989  8 

0,988  8 

0,987  6 

0,986  0 

0,983  9 

0,980  9 

0,976  4 

0,969  0 

0,954  2 

0,910  3 

0,4 

0,991  2 

0,990  7 

0,990  1 

0,989  4 

0,988  6 

.0,987  6 

0,986  4 

0,984  8 

0,982  7 

0,979  7 

0,975  2 

0,967  8 

0,953  0 

0,909  2 

0,6 

0,990  0 

0,989  5 

0,988  9 

0,988  3 

0,987  5 

0,986  5 

0,985  2 

0,983  6 

0,981  5 

0,978  5 

0,974  1 

0,966  7 

0,951  9 

0,908  1 

0,8 

0,988  8 

0,988  3 

0,987  8 

0,987  1 

0,986  3 

0,985  3 

0,984  0 

"C  982  5 

0,980  3 

0,977  4 

0,972  9 

0,965  5 

0,950  2 

0,907  0 

1,0 

0,987  6 

0,987  2 

0,986  6 

0,985  9 

0,985  1 

0,984  1 

0,982  9 

0  981  3 

0,979  2 

0,976  2 

0,971  7 

0,964  4 

0,949  6 

0,905  9 

1,2 

0,986  5 

0,986  0 

0,985  4 

0,984  7 

0,983  9 

0,982  9 

0,981  7 

0,980  1 

0,978  0 

0,975  0 

0,970  6 

0,963  2 

0,9485 

0,904  8 

1,4 

0,985  3 

0,984  8 

0,984  2 

0,983  5 

0,982  7 

0,981  8 

0,980  5 

0,978  9 

0,976  8 

0,973  9 

0,969  4 

0,962  0 

0,947  4 

0,903  8 

1,6 

0,984  1 

0,983  6 

0,983  1 

0,982  4 

0,981  6 

0,980  6 

0,979  3 

0,977  8 

0,975  7 

0,972  7 

0,968  3 

0,960  9 

0,946  2 

0,902  7 

1,8 

0,982  9 

0,982  4 

0,981  9 

0,981  2 

0,980  4 

0,979  4 

0,978  2 

0,976  6 

0,974  5 

0,971  5 

0,967  1 

0,959  8 

0,945  1 

0,901  6 

2,0 

0,981  8 

0,981  3 

0,980  7 

0,980  0 

0,979  2 

0,978  2 

0,977  0 

0,975  4 

0,973  3 

0,970  4 

0,966  0 

0,958  6 

0,944  0 

0,900  5 

2,2 

0,980  6 

0,980  1 

0,979  5 

0,978  9 

0,978  1 

0,977  1 

0,975  8 

0,974  3 

0,972  2 

0,969  2 

0,964  8 

0,957  5 

0,9423 

0,899  5 

2,4 

0,9794 

0,978  7 

0,978  4 

0,977  7 

0,976  9 

0,975  9 

0,974  7 

0,973  1 

0,971  0 

0,968  1 

0,963  7 

0,956  3 

0,941  7 

0,898  4 

2,6 

0,978  3 

0,977  8 

0,977  2 

0,976  5 

0,975  7 

0,974  8 

0,973  5 

0,972  0 

0,969  9 

0,966  9 

0,962  5 

0,955  2 

0,940  6 

0,897  3 

2,8 

0,977  1 

0,9766 

0,976  1 

0,975  4 

0,974  6 

0,973  6 

0,972  4 

0,970  8 

0,968  7 

0,965  8 

0,961  4 

0,954  1 

0,939  5 

0,896  3 

3,0 

0,975  9 

0,975  5 

0,974  9 

0,974  2 

0,973  4 

0,972  4 

0,971  2 

0,969  6 

0,967  6 

0,964  6 

0,960  2 

0,952  9 

0,938  4 

0,895  2 

3,2 

0,974  8 

0,974  3 

0,973  3 

0,973  1 

0,972  3 

0,971  3 

0.970  1 

0,968  5 

0,966  4 

0,963  5 

0,959  1 

0,951  8 

0,937  3 

0,894  1 

3,4 

0,973  6 

0,973  1 

0,972  6 

0,971  9 

0,971  1 

0,970  1 

0,968  9 

0,967  3 

0,965  3 

0,962  3 

0,958  0 

0,950  7 

0,936  2 

0,893  1 

3,6 

0,972  5 

0,972  0 

0,971  4 

0,970  8 

0,970  0 

0,969  0 

0,967  8 

0,966  2 

0,964  1 

0,961  2 

0,956  8 

0,949  5 

0,935  0 

0,892  0 

3,8 

0,971  3 

0,970  8 

0,970  3 

0,969  6 

0,968  8 

0,967  8 

0,966  6 

0,965  1 

0,963  0 

0,960  1 

0,955  7 

0,948  4 

0,933  9 

0,890  9 

4,0 

0,970  2 

0,969  7 

0,969  1 

0,968  5 

0,967  7 

0,966  7 

0,965  5 

0,963  9 

0,961  8 

0,958  9 

0,954  6 

0,947  3 

0,932  8 

0,889  9 

4,2 

0,969  0 

0,968  5 

0,968  0 

0,967  3 

0,966  5 

0,965  6 

0,964  3 

0,962  8 

0,960  7 

0,957  8 

0,953  4 

0,946  2 

0,931  7 

0,888  8 

4,4 

0,967  9 

0,967  4 

0,966  8 

0,966  2 

0,965  4 

0,964  4 

0,963  2 

0,961  6 

0,959  6 

0,9566 

0,952  3 

0,945  1 

0,930  6 

0,887  8 

4,6 

0,966  7 

0,966  3 

0,965  7 

0,965  0 

0,964  2 

0,963  3 

0,9621 

0,960  5 

0,958  4 

0,955  5 

0,951  2 

0,943  9 

0,929  5 

0,886  7 

4,8 

0,965  6 

0,965  1 

0,964  6 

0,963  9 

0,963  1 

0,962  1 

0,960  9 

0,959  4 

0,957  3 

0,954  4 

0,950  0 

0,942  8 

0,928  4 

0,885  7 

5,0 

0,964  5 

0,964  0 

0,963  4 

0,962  8 

0,962  0 

0,961  0 

0,959  3 

0,958  3 

0,956  2 

0,953  3 

0,949  0 

0,941  8 

0,927  4 

0,884  7 

NQTE  —  The  number  of  significant  figures  given  in  the  columns  for  coefficient  of  discharge  should  not  be  taken  to  imply  a  corresponding  accuracy 
but  only  to  assist  in  interpolation  and  analysis. 


Table  2  —  Velocity  coefficients  for  rectangular  throated  flumes 


_4 
27 


Bj   \h  +  d 


C\  Cl  -  C™  +  1  =  0 


b_ 
B 

h 

h  +  p     D 

1,0 

0,9 

0,8 

0,7 

0,6 

0,5 

0,4 

0,3 

0,2 

0,10 

1,002  2 

1,001  8 

1,001  4 

1,001  1 

1,000  8 

1,0006 

1,000  4 

1,0002 

1,000  1 

0,15 

1,005  1 

1,004  1 

1,003  2 

1,002  5 

1,001  8 

1,001  3 

1,000  8 

1,000  5 

1,000  2 

0,20 

1,009  1 

1,007  3 

1,005  8 

1,004  4 

1,003  2 

1,002  2 

1,001  4 

1,0008 

1,000  4 

0,25 

1,014  3 

1,011  5 

1,009  1 

1,006  9 

1,005  1 

1,003  5 

1,002  2 

1,001  3 

1,000  6 

0,30 

1,020  9 

1,016  8 

1,013  2 

1,010  0 

1,007  3 

1,005  1 

1,003  2 

1,001  8 

1,000  8 

0,35 

1,029  0 

1,023  2 

1,0181 

1,013  7 

1,010  0 

1,006  9 

1,004  4 

1,002  5 

1,001  1 

0,40 

1,038  6 

1,0308 

1,024  0 

1,018  1 

1,013  2 

1,009  1 

1,005  8 

1,003  2 

1,001  4 

0,45 

1,050  0 

1,0397 

1,030  8 

1,023  2 

1,016  8 

1,011  5 

1,007  3 

1,004  1 

1,001  8 

0,50 

1,063  5 

1,050  0 

1,038  6 

1,029  0 

1,020  9 

1,014  3 

1,009  1 

1,005  1 

1,002  2 

0,55 

1,079  3 

1,062  0 

1,047  6 

1,035  7 

1,025  5 

1,017  5 

1,011  0 

1,006  1 

1,002  7 

0,60 

1,098  0 

1,076  0 

1,057  9 

1,042  9 

1,030  8 

1,020  9 

1,013  2 

1,007  3 

1,003  2 

0,65 

1,120  3 

1,092  1 

1,069  5 

1,051  3 

1,036  7 

1,024  8 

1,015  6 

1,008  6 

1,003  8 

0,70 

1,146  5 

1,1108 

1,082  9 

1,060  6 

1,042  9 

1,029  0 

1,018  1 

1,010  0 

1,004  4 

0,75 

1,1327 

1,0980 

1,071  1 

1,050  0 

1,0335 

1,020  9 

1,011  5 

1,005  1 

0,80 

1,1153 

1,082  9 

1,057  9 

1,0386 

1,024  0 

1,013  2 

1,005  8 

0,85 

1,1353 

1,096  0 

1,066  4 

1,044  1 

1,027  2 

1,014  9 

1,0065 

0,90 

1,1108 

1,^)76  0 

1,050  0 

1,030  8 

1,016  8 

1,007  3 

0,95 

1,127  5 

1,086  4 

1,056  4 

1,034  6 

1,018  8 

1,008  2 

1,00 

1,146  5 

1,098  0 

1,063  5 

1,038  6 

1,020  9 

1,009  1 

NOTE  —  The  number  of  significant  figures  given  in  the  columns  for  coefficient  of  velocity  should  not  be  taken  to  imply  a  corresponding  accuracy  but 
only  to  assist  in  interpolation  and  analysis. 


33 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


Table  3  —  Circular  functions  for  use  in 
deriving  calibration  of  U -throated  flumes 


e 

rad 

/,(« 

/2<0! 

/3<0> 

0,5 

0,061  21 

0,479  4 

0,019  62 

0,6 

0,087  33 

0,564  6 

0,033  49 

0,7 

0,117  6 

0,644  2 

0,051  82 

0,8 

0,151  6 

0,717  4 

0,075  05 

0,9 

0,189  2 

0,783  3 

0,103  3 

1,0 

0,229  8 

0,841  5 

0,136  3 

1,1 

0,273  2 

0,891  2 

0,173  9 

1,2 

0,318  8 

0,932  0 

0,215  6 

1,3 

0,366  2 

0,963  6 

0,260  6 

1,4 

0,415  0 

0,985  4 

0,308  1 

1,5 

0,464  6 

0,997  5 

0,357  4 

nil 

0,500  0 



1,000  0 



0,392  7 

/,  (0)  =  1/2(1  -  cos  0) 

f2  (0)  =  sin  9 

f3{6)  =  1/4(0  -  sin  0cos  0) 

Table  4  —  Recommended  roughness  values 


Values  in  millimetres 


Surface  classification 

Values  of  ks 

Good  example 

Normal  value 

Plastics  (and  similar) 

Perspex,  PVC  or  other  smooth-faced  plastics 

— 

0,003 

Asbestos  cement 

— 

0,015 

Resin-bonded,  glass  fibre  moulded  against  smooth  forms  of  sheet  metal  or  well-sanded  and  painted  timber 

0,03 

0,06 

Metal 

Smooth,  machined  and  polished  meta! 

0,003 

0,006 

Uncoated  sheet  metal,  rust  free 

0,015 

0,03 

Painted  sheet  metal 

0,03 

0,06 

Galvanized  metal 

0,06 

0,15 

Painted  or  coated  casting 

0,06 

0,15 

Uncoated  casting 

0,15 

0,3 

Concrete 

In-situ  or  precast  construction  using  steel  formwork,  with  all  irregularities  rubbed  down  or  filled  in 

0,06 

0,15 

In-situ  or  precast  construction  using  plywood  or  wrought  timber  formwork 

0,3 

0,6 

Smooth  trowelled  cement  rendering 

0,3 

0,6 

Concrete  with  thin  film  or  sewage  slime 

0,6 

1,5 

Wood 

Planed  timber  or  plywood 

0,3 

0,6 

Well  sanded  and  painted 

0,03 

0,06 

Table  5  —  Viscosity  of  water 

Temperature 

Kinematic  viscosity,  v 

°C 

m2/s 

0 

1,79  x  10-6 

5 

1,52  x  10-6 

10 

1,31  x  10-6 

15 

1,14  x  10-6 

20 

1,01  x  10-6 

25 

0,90  x  10-6 

30 

0,81  x  10-6 

34 


Con'H-'  hnn  slot 


^-—Stilling  we  I 


,- Approach  channel 


Entrance  transition  — 


IS  14869  :  2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


Standing  wave 


Exit  channel 


a)     Isometric  view  of  level  invert  flume  (p  =  01 


R^2(B-b) 


When  recovery  of  heaa  is  not 
important,  the  exit  transition  may  be 
truncated  after  half  its  length  (see 
above) 


In  a  flume  without  a  hump  (p  =  0), 
the  invert  over  this  length  shall  be 
truly  level. 


b)     Plan  view 


Connection  to  stilling  well 


^77^ 


77777 


This  radius  shall  be  chosen  so  that 
the  bottom  contraction  starts  at  the 
same  section  as  the  side  contractions. 
For  a  flume  with  a  bottom  contraction 
only,  the  radius  =  4  p. 


// 

/V 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

)   \ 

/ 

) 

/ 

// 

/ 

/ 

Front  view 
(raised  invert) 


c)     Longitudinal  section  of  flume  with  raised  invert  (hump) 


Figure  1  —  Rectangular  throated  flume 


35 


8 


TTTTT 


Approach  transition 


Throat 


Exit  transition 


WW 

u  SS 


b)     Section 


Figure  2  -  Rectangular  throated  standing  wave  flume 


U 

< 

La 

\~"~^^ 

D 

T  f  f  f  f  \ 

t?TTT? 

' 

0 

. 

*      QQ 

L 

Li 

XLb 

o lining  uasin 

^3 

; 

3  - 

] 
a 

/^ 

Hump 

-Q 

Baffle  wall 

I 

Deflector                 "~-» ^^^ 
a)     Plan  view 

■ 

LJLLU 

LLJ 

44   i  i   A  k 

Height  of  hump  =  p 


Glacis  slope  2  :  1 

Z.2=0,69A/  +  2Ap 


Lb 


-OC^. 


L3 


5S 


b>    Section 


Figure  3  —  Design  of  a  flumed  standing  wave  fall 


WW 

«  2 

to  <o 
So 


IS   14869  :2000 
ISO   4359:  1983 


connecting  pipe 


■  Stilling  well 


r^*r-S 


Front  view 

with  pump  (/>   „-   o 


/      Entrance  transition 
. Throat 


Approach  channel i 


a)     Isometric  view  of  level  invert  flume  {p  =  0) 


Head 


1  in  6  expansion  for  high  modular 
limit  and  head  recovery 


3  to  4/7  max 


This  radius  chosen  so  that  entrance 
transition  lies  entirely  within  a  plane 
defining  a  1  in  3  contraction. 


b)     Plan  view 

(Example  shown,  no  hump, 


ma  -  in,  skew  cylinder  entrance  transition) 


Exit  transition 


Exit  channel 


Standing  wave 


Plane  (ma  #  m,  no  hump) 


CI 


Connection  to 
stilling  well 

c'     Longitudinal  section  of  flu 


Not  more  than  1  in  3 
(or  equivalent  curve) 


Generators  are 
straight  lines 


me  with  raised  invert  (hump) 

Figure  4  -  Trapezoidal  throated  flume 


Warped  Una  *  m,  no  hump) 
d)     Examples  of  plans  of  entrance  transitions 


38 


IS  14869:  2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


Approach  channel 


Entrance  transition 


nnel 


Invert  line 


a)     Isometric  view 


The  straight  sided  contraction  may 
be  replaced  by  curved  surfaces, 
provided  they  lie  within  the  full  lines. 


1  in  6-expansion  for  high 
—  modular  limit  and  head  recovery 


*>1,5(0a-0) 


In  a  flume  without  hump 
(p  =  0),  the  invert  over  this 
length  shall  be  truly  level 


Front  view 
(level  invert) 


b)     Plan  view 


77777777777Y777?7. 


Connection  to 
stilling  well 


W?7777777^?^ 


7~r 


—  In  a  level  flume,  p  =  0 

For  a  flume  with  a  hump,  a 
convenient  value  of  p  is  0,5  {Da  -  D) 

c)     Longitudinal  section  of  flume  with  raised  invert  (hump) 


Front  view 
(raised  invert) 


Figure  5  —  U-shaped  flume 


39 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359:1983 


<J> 


.0,5 

0,6 

0,7 

0,8 

0,9 

1,0 

1,2b    ~ 

— 

^  oc\    - 

\,l\) 

4 

if* 

!  > 

11^    - 

/ 

ijj 

0* 

r     e 

¥ 

s- 

X" 

1  in    - 

l,IU 

1  ftR      - 

l,UD 

,*><>* 

to^ 

■ 

t\0 

*c« 

>\ea 

1 

*e^ 

100      ■ 

.,.-. 

0,1  0,2  0,3  0,4  0,5 


A  A 

NOTE  —  For  a  trapezoidal  throat  flume  Cu  is  replaced  by  Cs.  In  a  U-shaped  flume  b  =  D. 
Figure  6  —  Coefficient  of  approach  velocity,  C. 


40 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


I 

CM 

+ 


1,0 


0,5 


Z-      0,2 


n 


0,1 


0,05 


— — ^ , __  _______ 

— — — — — — —— — —  — — —   ^t     ^^-^^—  ___^  _  __  __  _  _ 

h-i — I 1- v — T- 

=nzzt:::=z:=__=__|E=::-v 


0,1 


0,2 


0,5  1  2 

Side  slope  m  (m  horizontal  to  1  vertical) 


10 


Figure  7  —  Values  of  tj  for  use  in  determining  CD  :  trapezoidal  flumes 


41 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


5,0 
4,5 
4,0 

3.0" 
2,5 
2,0 

2,6 
2,4 
2,2 

2,0 
Of  1,8 

1,6 
1,4 
1,2 
1,0 


TTTTrfWH 

I""     I      111 — II      II — I — I    I   I  I  I  I  I  I  1 1 


10 


mHce  I  he 


0,2        0,3 


0,5  1,0 

mHce/  be 


C1 


1,2 
1,1 
1.0 


0,02       0,03         0,05  0,1 

mHce  /bs 

NOTE  -  If  inlf^Hif,  >  5  obtain  Cs  from  figure  9. 

Figure  8  -  Shape  coefficient  for  trapezoidal  flumes 


20 


MIL  M_M  N J/ 1 

— , — , — ( — . — _ ( ^/ 

1 — ^j — _ — ___^ ^__ 

"^ ! 

—-^^^-j^ 1 ^_ 1 | 

—J — I  I  I  I  I — I  i  MINI — (Hi 


2,0 


■ 

I 

— 

I  'I 

i 

I 

[— 

IJJ 

JU 

, 

>P  'J    ' 
.   !  i  I  I  I  I 

—I 

0,2 


42 


100 


b  =  1,22/t? 


m  =0,90 


NOTE  —  Broken  lines  indicate  location  of  grid  on  overlay  when  in  position. 

Figure  9  —  Design  method  using  overlay  for  trapezoidal  flumes 


CO  CO 
°_ 

8  22 
So 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


0,1 


"ce  ID, 


1,0 

1 

5 

2,0 

3,0 

1,1) 

■ 

0,95 

-e 

^^t 

^^* 

r\ 

|  -- 

xj  0,90 

i 

A 

1 

^~ 

0,85 

--- 

0,80 

r 

— - 

... 



~T      ■■■ 

f 



,^ 

__. 

— 

^ .. 

... 



■ 

_  _ 

— 

1 

■ 

....    .....    .... 

— 



0,85 


0,80 


0,75 
0,70 
0,65 
0,60 
0,55 
0,50 
0,45 
0,40 


k? 


0,2 


0,3  0,4  0,6  0,8         1,0 


Hce  ID, 


Figure  10  —  Shape  coefficient  for  U-shaped  flumes 


44 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


^3 

C 

to 


1,0 


0,8 


0,6 


0,4 


0,2 


—  <A. 

\        $/- 

W 

*"* 

\^ 

y; 

•  <% 

X 

■^sT" 

.0,01  0,05      0,1  0,5       1  5        10 

Trapezoidal,  mHQlb;  U-shaped,  HCJD 
NOTE  -  i//  =  0  for  U-shaped. 


2,5 


2,3 


2,1 


1.9 


1,7 


50     100 


1.5 


Figure  11  —  Accuracy  coefficients,  y,  y/,  0 


45 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


a  left 

— r-r-  -1      x   100  =  6,9  % 
a  right 

a) 


46 


Figure  12  -  Examples  of  velocity  profile  in  approach  channel 


0,010 

! 

0,009 

0,008 

t-    *J^ 

W". 

P\^- 

0,007 

f  \>)y^ 

\<& 

0,006 

/       \  \V^ 

/         V^\^ 

/            i  Ik 

r^CfiD 

0,005 

i>-i 

Ik   = 

r\nC\ 

N?v 

s'      i\ 

OOU 

0,004 

c 

'/ 

_  4 

^*^— —  / 

10  000 

fjj 

,^                           L. 

"^s 

0,003 

/ 

>>y 

^-^       liks-  :suuuu 

^ _— -  '   " 

/ 

Ja-s  =  i 

000  000 

0,002 

-7^Tra 

^— -  turb 

isition  to 
ulent 
ndary 
rat 

v 

X 

<^r- 

Smooth 

Uk 

sy  OQ 

laye 

f>5 

H: 7" 

r —    i 

\ 

0,001 

\ Lower  limit  tor  smooth 

laboratory  installations 

10' 


106  10' 

Reynolds  number  Re  =    VLIv 
Figure  13  -  Relative  boundary  layer  displacement  thickness 


10' 


5 


si 

s  a 


£ 


£.\J\J 

100 

50 

. 

1 

?o 

L.  \t 

10 

, 

—  M.   ,  —  ■      : _„ 

5 

. 

2 

i 

, 

, 

0,01       0,02 


0,05        0.1 


0,2 


0,5  1 


10 


20 


50        100 


11  M 


CO 


Figure  14  —  Values  of  w  lb  for  use  in  determining  Re  :  trapezoidal  flumes 


01 


1.0 


0,9 


0,8 


5     0,7 
0,6 


0.5 


IS  14869:2000 
ISO  4359  :  1983 


/ 

0,1  0,2  0,3         0,4         0,5  0,6         0,7 

Hz/D,HzJDe 


NOTE  -  wJD  =  1,00  when  HJD  >  0,70. 


Figure  15  —  Values  of  w  lb  for  use  in  determining  Re  :  U-shaped  flumes 


49 


IS   "14869:2000 
ISO   4359  :  1983 


0,25  d, 


0,20  di 


0,15tfa 


a 
E 

3 


a 

'3 

x 


0,10  d, 


0,05c/a  - 


0,00  rfa 


0,2 


^^z=2,0\ 

iQ  =  C^az 

3^_ 

i 

:=i£I— 

1.0 


0,4  0,6  0,8 

Fraction  J  of  design  discharge 
Figure  16  -  Showing  height  of  hump  required  to  give  proportionality  for  a  small  variation  in  discharge 


50 


0,2Sd 


0,20  tf 


0,15  d, 


0,10  d 


0,05  c/ 


0,00  d 


z  in  Q  =  f  1  tf a 


Figure  17  -  Showing  height  of  hump  to  attain  bulk  proportionality 


IS   14869:2000 
ISO  4359:  1983 


51 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.    WRD  I   (229). 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters  : 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110  002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central        :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110  002 

Eastern       :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA  700  054 

Northern     :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 
Southern     :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI 600  113 


Western 


Branches 


Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI 400  093 


Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

("323  76  17 
\323  38  41 

f337  84  99,  337  85  61 
L337  86  26,  337  91  20 


{ 


60  38  43 
60  20  25 


J235  02  16,235  04  42 
\235  15  19,  235  23  15 

f832  92  95,  832  78  58 
1.832  78  91,832  78  92 


AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  :  Prabhat  Offset  Press,  New  Delhi-2 


