**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10531 (1983) : Code of practice for selection and use of 
fire resistant hydraulic fluids [PCD 3: Petroleum, 
Lubricants and their Related Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS : 10531 - isaa 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR SELECTION AND USE OF 
MKL-RtSlSTANT HYDRAULIC FLUIDS 



U DC 62 1 ' 852 000*2 : 620' 1 93- 5 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN^ W MUAIiim SHAH /AKAK M \RG 

NEW DEL HI IllMXJ;; 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR SELECTION AND USE OF 

FIRE-RESISTANT HYDRAULIC FLUIDS 

Lubricants and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCDC 4 

Vice-Chairman Representing 

Shki p. K. Goel Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Research & Develop- 

ment Centre ), Faridabad 

Members 
Shri a. K. Arora Steel Authority of India Limited ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Dr N. T. Baddi Association of Manufacturers of Petroleum Speciali- 

ties, Bombay 
Shri R. Chakravarty ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Bhadba Inter-Plant Standardization in Steel Industry, 

Subcommittee on Oils and Lubricants, IPSS 1 : 9 
Shri P. M Bhambi Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra Dun 

Shri Sudhir Singhal ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Bhargava Petroleum Re-refiners Association of India, Madras 

Shri Shajttilal Daya ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Bhatnagar Indrol Lubricants & Specialities Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. Sethuraman ( Alternate ) 
Dr K. S. Bhattacharaya Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri A. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Chapra Central Institute of Road Transport ( Training & 

Research ), Pune 
Shri M. H. Narurkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr D. K. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri N. C Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
RDSO LucKNOw 

Assistant Research 
Officer ( Chem-I ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. G. Goswami Assam Oil Division, Bombay 

Shri I. Chakdra ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. D. Haridas Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, 

Jamshedpur 
Shri B. Goswami ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS ! 10531 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr G. Jayarama Rao Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals & Fertilizers 

Shri T. P, Subrahmanyam ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. K. JuifEJA Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri I. M. Merchant ( Alternate ) 
Shrt S. K. Kale Steel Authority of India Limited ( Bhilai Steel 

Plant ), Bhilai 
Shri J. L. Grover ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Lobo Oil Co-ordination Committee, New Delhi 

Shri S. N. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Lt GeorgI': Mathew Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 

Shri S. R. Mehta Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. M. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Mxjkherjee Indian Oil Blending Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. J, Shah { Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Nambiar Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Marketing Division ), 

Bombay 

Shri B. Sanghavi ( Alternate ) , ^ 

Shri Rajikder Sinoh Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Refineries Pipelines 

Division ), New Delhi 
Shri D. K. Das Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shki T. R. Ramakrishnan The Tata Iron & Sterol Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri R. A. Rao Lubrizol India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. L. Malik' ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Sastry The Automotive Research Association of India, 

Pune 
Shri B. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Satyanarayanan Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri N. N. Savaht Petrosil Oil Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. A. Paes ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Singh Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri R. K. Gupta ( Alternate I ) 
Shri T. V. Sunderrajak ( Alternate II ) 
Cdb K. C. Sinha Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri RaJendra Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. D. Srivastava Ministry of Defence ( IMS & RDE ) 

Dr P . S. Venkataramahi ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. V. Varghese Madras Refineries Ltd, Madras 

Shri G. Sambamurthy ( Alternate ) , , ^ 

Shri M. S. Saxena, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offiao Member ) 

Director ( P & C ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. A. U. Khak 
Deputy Director ( P & C ), ISI 

Turbine, Compressor and Hydraulic Oils Subcommittee, PCDG 4:11 

Convener 
Shri K. S. Anand Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Research & Develop- 

ment Centre ), Faridabad 
Members 
Shri B. Ramachandran ( Alternate to 

Shri K. S. Anand ) ,^ . ^ 

( Continued on page 13) 

2 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR SELECTION AND USE OF 

FIRE-RESISTANT HYDRAULIC FLUIDS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 12 April 1983, after the draft finalized by the Lubricants 
and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

0,2 This code of practice has been prepared with a view to recommen- 
ding basic safety requirements for the selection and use of fire-resistant 
hydraulic fluids used for various applications, such as mining industry, 
steel plants, aluminium smelters, die-casting and foundries, plastic pro- 
cessing units, etc. This code prescribes their types, applications and the 
features governing their selection along with the possible fire hazards 
associated with the various hydraulic systems. 

0.3 In the preparation of this code considerable assistance has been 
derived from the following publications: 

a) Mines Saf^yGbmnati^ea. of the European Communities. Fifth 
Report on *Specife:atioa and testing conditions relating to fire- 
resistant fluids used for power transmissi^a', Luxembourg, 15th 
November 1974. 

b) Association of Hydraulic Equipment Manufacturers. *Code of 
practice for the use of fluids in industrial hydraulic system*. 
London, February 1973. 

c) Ralph Lemar Troper maintenance practices for fire-resistant 
hydraulic fluid systems'. Lubrication Engineering, October 197G. 

d) IS : 7895-1975 Tests for fire-resistant characteristic of hydraulic 
fluids used in mining machinery. Indian Standards Institution. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accord- 
ance with 18:2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in 
this standard. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ] 

3 



ISri053i- 1983 

1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard lays down the code of practice for selection and use 
of fire-resistant hydraulic fluids used for various applications, such as 
mining industry, steel plants., aluminium smelters, foundries, die-casting, 
plastic processing industries, etc. 

2. HYDRAULIC FLUID APPLICATIONS 

2,1 Fluid power systems are used for mobile applications, such as forklift 
trucks, mining and earth moving equipment, etc, and stationary appli- 
cations covering various mechanical actuating and manipulating 
devices in a wide variety of industries. Particular mention may be made 
of the mining industry, metal processing units, such as steel plants and 
aluminium smelters, die-casting and foundries, and plastic processing 
units where hydraulic systems of diverse designs are employed often to 
work under hostile environment. 

2.1.1 The essential components of a hydraulic system are a prime 
mover^ such as an electric motor or an internal combustion engine, a 
pumping unit or a torque convertor, an actuator and associated piping 
and control equipment. Normal fluid pressures in most systems vary 
from 70 to 280 kg/cm^ while some special applications may operate at 
pressures as high as 1 400 kg/cm^. Apart from its basic function of 
being an incompressible medium to transmit power, the fluid is expected 
to possess the following properties: 

a) Adequate viscosity at all working temperatures — low enough to 
ensure easy flowability at low temperatures, and high enough to 
provide sufficient film strength for lubrication and prevent undue 
leakage across working clearances at high temperatures; 

b) Thermal and oxidation stability at the highest expected operating 
temperature; 

c) Emulsion/chemical stability to give adequate working life; 

d) Anti-wear and load carrying capacity; 

e) Anti-foam and rapid air-release property; 

f) Anti-rust and corrosion-inhibition; and 

g) Compatibility with system materials like metals and alloys, 
elastomer seals and hoses. 

3. FIRE HAZARDS ASSOCIATED WITH HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS 

3.1 Petroleum fluids are most widely used as hydraulic fluids as they are 
available in plenty and relatively inexpensive. Besides, these could be 
readily supplemented with additives to meet the necessary performance 
requirements. However, petroleum fluids suffer from a serious dis- 



18:10531-1983 

advantage in that they are flammable. Finely dispersed oil droplets in 
mixture with air could ignite with explosive force under certain 
circumstances. 

3.2 Most mineral oils used in hydraulic systems have flash points between 
150°C and 250°C. These fluids when ignited will burn readily and 
continuously until the oil is consumed. In an ignited high or low 
pressure spray, the flame can travel both up and down stream. The 
mineral oil can also ignite spontaneously on contact with a hot surface, 
and a temperature of about 340°C is often sufficient to cause spontaneous 
combustion. However, localized temperatures as low as 20O''C could 
also cause eventual spontaneous combustion when the oil is soaked into 
porous substances like textiles, insulation materials, dust deposits, etc, due 
to high temperature oxidation reactions. 

3.3 Leakage of fluid from pipe connections and gasket fittings, rupture 
of high pressure pipes and hoses, and accidental disconnection of 
hydraulic piping under pressure are the common sources of potential 
danger. At a pressure of even 70 ks^/cm^ the fluid from a pin-hole leak 
may be projected to a distance of 12 metres. The release of fluid from 
any of the above causes combined with nearness of an ignition source 
constitutes a serious fire hazard. 

3.4 Ignition sources can be of the following categories: 

a) Open flames from gas fired melting crucibles, welding torches 
and accidental fires; 

b) Sparks or arcs from process working, electric welding and short 
circuits; 

c) Hot surfaces of furnaces and furnace parts, lagged pipes, molten 
metals and frictionally heated parts; and 

d) Self-ignition due to overheating of the fluids. 

4. TYPES OF FIRE-RESISTANT HYDRAULIC FLUIDS { FRHF ) 

4.0 Hydraulic fluids used as fire resistant media obtain this property 
either from the presence of water or from their chemical structure. 
These fluids, known-under generic name *fire-resistant hydrauhc fluids', 
are broadly classified under the following categories: 

4.1 Classification of FRHF Fluids 

Designation Class Type 

HF-A Oil-in-water emulsion usually containing 95 percent 

water. Combustible material limited to 20 percent 
Max, 

HF-B Water-in-oil emulsions usually containing 40 to 45 

percent water. Combustible material limited to 
60 percent Max. 

5 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

HF-G Water-glycol solutions usually containing 40 percent 

water. 

HF-D Fluids based on phosphate esters, other organic 

esters or synthesized hydrocarbon finids contain- 
ing no water. 

4*2 General Applications 

4.2.1 Oil'in-Water Emulsion Types ( HF-A ) — These are essentially 2 to 
5 percent of soluble oil emulsiued in water. These are highly fire- 
resistant and their chief advantage is low cost. Improved emulsions 
up to 10 percent oil are used in coal mines for hydraulic roof support 
systems. The utilization range of temperature for these fluids is 5 to 
55^0, 

4.2.2 Water -in- Oil Emulsions ( Inrjert Emulsions ) Types ( HF-B ) — These 
are dispersions of water in a continuous phase of niinera] oil with the 
help of special emulsifiers and stabilizers and supplemented with 
inhibitor and other performance additives. These emulsions normally 
contain about 40 percent of water. The utilization range of temperatures 
for these grades is 5 to 60°C. 

4.2.3 W ater-Glycols Types {HF-C) — These are aqueous solutions of 
poly-glyco]s containing about 40 percent water. Although these fluids are 
true solutions and not emulsions, and hence possess better ^stability, they 
have other limitations typical of water and oil emulsions besides being 
more expensive. The utilization range of these fluids is — 10 to +60°C. 

4.2.4 Synthetic Fluid Types ( HF-D ) — The most commonly used 
synthetic fluids are Y^hospha.te esters, usually mixtures of several single 
compounds, such a trioctyl, triphenyl, and tricresyl phosphates. These 
have auto-ignition temperatures in the region oi 550 to 600*^0 and are 
fire-resistant by virtue of their molecular structure Due to their superior 
stability characteristics, the utilization range of temperature of these 
fluids is — 20to+150^G, although the maximum recommended bulk 
fluid operating temperature is 70°C for large volume systems. 

5. FACTORS GOVERNING SELECTION OF FIRE-RESISTANT 
HYDRAULIC FLUIDS ( FRHF ) 

5.0 The following physico-chemical and performance characteristics 
have to be considered for the design of the hydraulic equipment as well 
as for the selection o£ an appropriate fluid for a given system. These 
considerations shall also prevail at the time of changing over from one 
fluid to the other in an existing system. 



IS:lD53i - I 9oo 

5.1 Relative Density 

5.1.1 Compared to mineral oils, the fire-resistant hydraulic fluids have 
relative densities as per the following: 

Mineral oils 0*87 to 0*90 

Invert emulsions 0'92 to 0*95 

Water glycols 1*05 to M 

Synthetic fluids M to 1*5 

5.1.2 While the higher relative density in the case of invert emulsions 
is not very sigificant, that of water glycols and synthetic fluids should 
be taken into account when selecting pumps and designing inlet 
conditions. Sufficient allowance shall also be made for pressure drop 
across filters, pipes and couplings. Inlet line filtration shalll be 
limited to strainers. The adverse effect of high relative density is 
analogous to that of too high fluid viscosity and could lead to cavitation 
problems. Cavitation could also be caused by the presence of free 
v^ater in both emulsions and water glycol mixtures. Flow velocity 
through suction pipes should not exceed I'O m/s and also low or negative 
pressures at the pump inlet should be avoided. 

5*2 Viscosity and V.I. Characteristics 

5.2.1 Both water based fluids and synthetic fluids are available in a 
wide range of viscosities. Emulsion and water glycol mixtures vary in 
viscosity depending on the amount of water. 

5.2.2 With regard to viscosity-temperature characteristics, emulsions 
and water glycol mixtures have an apparent viscosity index of 
approximately 150 and there are not normally any problems in relation 
to the working temperature range. Emulsions, being two-phase fluids, 
exhibit non-Newtonian behaviour at high shear rates. Under thin film 
conditions of lubrication, this may result in reduction of equipment life 
compared to mineral oils. 

5.2.3 With regard to synthetic fluids, even when blended with V.L 
improvers, they do not compare favourably with conventional mineral 
oils, particularly at low temperatures. Therefore, careful consideration 
should be given to the selection of the fluid from the view point of the 
viscosity-temperature curve in relation to low temperature start-up, as 
well as the working range of temperatures. In certain low temperature 
conditions, it may be necessary to make arrangements for heating the 
fluids for easy cold start-up. 

5.3 Stability 

5,3.1 The stability characteristics of FRHF differ considerably accord- 
ing to the type of the fluid. In general, the problems pertain to the 

7 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

emulsion break-up in the case of emulsion, loss of water in the case of 
water glycols, and thermal oxidation and hydrolytic degradation in 
the case of synthetic fluids. The following are some of the factors that 
affect the stability of these fluids. 

5.3.2 In case of water based fluids, the working temperature range is 
limited by the water phase. The safe maximum temperature of these 
fluids is specified as 60°G, since the rate of evaporation becomes high 
above this temperature. Emulsions are also adversely affected by 
chemical contamination. The loss of water in the water glycols makes 
them too viscous, leading to operational problems. Loss of water from 
both invert emulsions and water glycols decreases their apparent 
viscosities and reduces their fire-resistance. Hence, a careful check shall 
be maintained on the water content of the fluids and appropriate 
replenishment steps should be taken as per the recommendations of the 
fluid supplier. Normally, loss of water up to about 5 percent could be 
tolerated. With regard to the low temperature start-up, tank heating 
should be avoided to the extent possible but,* if essential, immersion 
heater surface should not emit more than 3 W/cm^. 

5.3.3 With regard to the synthetic fluids, although the safe maximum 
temperature is stipulated as 150°C, the bulk fluid temperature should 
preferably be limited to 70°C. At higher temperatures, these products 
are subject to rapid deterioration and therefore need to be checked 
frequently. If necessary, cooling arrangements for bulk fluids should be 
adopted. With regard to low temperature start-up problems, the heat- 
ing capacity of the immersion heaters should be restricted to 0*65 
W/cm^, Although synthetic fluids are not miscible with water, such 
contamination can lead to corrosion and chemical degradation of the 
fluids. Therefore, precaution should be taken to avoid moisture/water 
ingress. 

5.4 Lubrication Properties 

5»4«1 Oil-in-water emulsions have relatively low viscosity and poor 
lubricating properties. 

5*4.2 Invert emulsions have viscosities similar to, or higher than, 
normal mineral oil hydraulic fluids; and since the continuous phase is 
oil, their lubricating properties are usually quite good. They are non- 
Newtonian fluids, and hence the viscosity can vary depending upon the 
shear forces applied.. 

5.4.3 Water glycols are true solutions with excellent viscosity-tempe- 
rature characteristics. Their lubricating properties are quite good under 
most hydrodynamic and boundary conditions, but they do greatly 
reduce the fatigue life of rolling contact bearings. 

8 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

5.4.4 The 4-ball wear and vane pump tests are used by the industry 
to evaluate the load carrying and anti- wear properties of these fluids. 
While no pass limits have yet been laid down with respect to these tests 
for FRHF, the test data provided by the fluid suppliers and the field 
experience collated by the equipment manufacturers and users continue 
to serve as the principal guiding factors in the selection of FRHF. 

5.5 Compatibility with System Materials 

5.5.1 Hydraulic systems have metallic components made of different 
types of metals and alloys and a wide variety of elastomers, such as 
gaskets, seals and hoses. Compatibility between these materials and the 
fluids should be ascertained before introducing the fluid into the system. 
The following are some of the considerations in this regard, 

5.5.2 Ferrous metals, stainless steel, brass and copper do not generally 
pose any problem of incompatibility, although galvanic corrosion may 
occur between copper and steel mating surfaces in water based systems. 
Most other non-ferrous metals with the exception of magnesium are also 
compatible with emulsions and synthetic fluids. Difficulties have been 
known to arise with phosphate esters where aluminium is present as a 
load bearing surface. Water glycols are compatible with all common 
metals but zinc, cadmium and magnesium are adversely affected, 
henccj an adequate system check shall be made for use of water glycols. 
As a general practice, galvanized piping should be avoided in hydraulic 
systems using FRHF, as zinc can flake off and introduce contamination. 
These fluids should not be packed in galvanized drums. 

5.5.3 Seals, gaskets and flexible hoses which are compatible with 
mineral oils are normally satisfactory with emulsions and water glycol 
fluids. Viton, PTFE, silicone rubber and many other polymers are also 
satisfactory but the equipment or fluid supplier should be consulted for 
each application. Cork and leather type materials are unsuitable for 
water containing fluids. 

5.5.4 In the case of synthetic fluids, special care is necessary to ensure 
compatibility with the elastomers. Materials like Viton, PTFE, 
silicone and butyl rubbers may be suitable but the fluid suppliers shall be 
consulted for each application. 

5.5.5 The compatibility property is checked by suspending the 
elastomer material in the fluids for 21 days under given test conditions 
( temperature 60/i50°C ). The observations pertain to variation in 
volume ( swelling/shrinkage ) and hardening or modification of the 
elastomer surface. 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

5.5.6 Paint compatibility is generally poor for all these fluids which 
attack most paints and release debris that could clog strainers and valves. 
It is, therefore, desirable to avoid painting of the surfaces that come in 
contact with fluids, although some fluid suppliers recommend the use of 
epoxy type paints. 

5.6 Filtration 

5.6.1 The FRHF, particularly water based fluids, tend to retain con- 
taminant particles, such as dust, pump wear debris, and packing seal 
materials and do not allow these to settle out as readily as mineral oils 
do. Efficient filtration is therefore, essential for ensuring adequate pro- 
tection to the equipment. The following are some general guidelines 
in this regard. 

5.6.2 On the pump inlet side strainers which can remove discrete 
particulate matter should be used. These should have their flow capa- 
city minimum twice or preferably 4 times the rated pump capacity, so as 
not to aggravate suction lift conditions. Filters in the high pressure 
circuit and tank return lines should be able to remove contaminant 
particles in the range of 10 to 25 microns. These filters also should 
possess flow capacity preferably 4 times that of the pump rated capacity. 
Filter materials shall not react with the fluids to cause removal of 
additives. 

5.6.3 The inlet strainers are generally metal wire-mesh or of sintered 
type. Earth filters and felt type elements are not recommended, parti- 
cularly for water based fluids. If paper filters are to be used, these 
should be of resin-impregnated type. 

5.7 Toxicity 

5.7.1 FRHF specifications in most developed countries have stringent 
toxicological criteria. These pertain to determination of acute toxicity, 
irritation of skin and mucous membranes based on laboratory investiga- 
tions on animals. Due consideration is required in this regard for adop- 
tion of suitable methods for evaluating products used in the country. 

5.8 Fire-Resistant Properties 

5.8.1 Fire-resistant properties are the primary requisite of FRHF. The 
Indian Standards Institution, after considerable review of the yimcms 
international standards and practices in this regard, has formulatad 
IS : 7895-1975* which prescribes the following three tests for fire-resi^t^nt 
characteristics of hydraulic fluids used in mining machinery: 

a) Autogenous ignition temperature test — The fluids are expected to 
have auto-ignition temperatures of not less than 315°C; 

♦Tests for fire-resistant characteristics of hydraulic fluids used in mining machinery. 

10 



IS: 10531-1983 

b) Temperature- pressure spray ignition test — The flaramability 
chaaracteristics of the fluids are limited under certain defined 
conditions of fluid spray over three different ignition sources; and 

c) Flame propagation in a mixture of fluid and coal dust — A mixture 
of 75 g of specified coal dust and 37*5 ml of the fluid is expected 
to restrain propagation of flame to certain defined limits under 
the condition of the test. 

5.8.2 The Director General of Mines Safety of the Government of India 
has been designated as the approving authority for qualifying hydraulic 
fluids as fire-resistant. The Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun, 
and the Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad, are expected to 
provide the necessary testing and evaluation facilities and assist the 
Director General of Mines Safety in his approval function. 

5*9 Ghange-Over from One Fluid to Another 

5*9*1 As most hydraulic systems are designed to operate on mineral 
oils, the first important step is the selection of an appropriate fluid based 
on considerations of system design and operating conditions, with parti- 
cular reference to type of pump, system materials and elastomers, and 
anticipated range of operating temperatures. For introducting the 
selected fluid in the system, particularly when a different fluid is already 
in use, the following procedure is suggested: 

a) The hydraulic system should be drained as completely as possible, 

paying particular attention to the low level points in pipelines, 
pumps, valves and other accessories. If possible, some of these 
components should be dismantled and cleaned; 

b) All filters should be cleaned and replaced. Paper filter elements 
should be renewed, paying attention to the need for the resin- 
impregnated type; 

c) Seals, hoses and other elastomer materials should be checked 
and replaced as per compatibility requirements; 

d) The system is given an initial fill of the fluid for purpose of flush- 
ing. In the case of water based fluids, the system if run under* 
no-load condition for about two hours or as per the duration 
suggested by the fluid supplier. In the case of synthetic fluids, 
the system is operated for a period of 16 to 24 hours: and 

e) The flush charge is drained while the fluid is warm, again pay- 
ing attention to the low level points. The system is then given 
a fresh charge and is ready for operation. 

5.9,2 For ensuring a proper quality leval of the fluid at first fill and 
also during use, the following additional control checks would be of 
help: 

a) In the case of emulsions, water content and droplet size of water 
particles are of importance. Stable invert emulsions could be 

11 



IS : 10531 - 1983 

prepared only through vigorous agitation using equipment, such 
as high speed stirrers, homogenisers and sonic vibrator emuJsifiers. 
The average water particle size should be controlled at a 2-microns 
level, with only a few random particles of 4 to 5 microns; 

b) Water content should be checked in the case of both emulsions, 
and water glycols, either through direct determination of water 
or indirectly from viscosity and density considerations. For 
make-up of water which should invariably be distilled or 
deionized, the fluid supplier should be consulted on the methodo- 
logy; 

c) In the case of water glycols, acidity tests also help detect con- 
tamination or component depletion. A change in pH value of 
more than 0'5 should alert the user for more detailed investigation 
for contamination or component depletion. 

d) Synthetic fluids could be checked for contamination, through 
periodic routine determinations, such as density, water content^ 
acidity and settling tests. It is however desirable that the fluid 
supplier should be consulted on more precise methodology of 
exercising quality checks on the product in use. Mineral oil 
contamination should be restricted to 5 percent, Max. 



12 



IS : 10531 - 1983 



( Continued from page 2 ) 



Members Representing 

Shki A. K. Arora Steel Authority of India Limited ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Shri M. K. Bhargava Petroleum Re-refiners Association of India, Madras 

Shri Shaktilai. Daya ( Alternate ) 
Shei S. R. Bhatnagar Indrol Lubricants & Specialities Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. SethuraMan ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Ghapra Central Institute of Road Transport ( Training & 

Research ), Pune 

Shri M. H. Narurkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. C. Chatterjee ' National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. A. Dhib Lubrizol India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. A. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri O. K. Juneja Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri G. Balakrishkan ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Kaemarkar Automobile Products of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Mehta Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. Krishnamoorthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. M. Merchant Bhavnagar Oil & Chemical Industries Pvt Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri A. F. J. Baplist ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Mukherji Indian Oil Blending Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. J. Shah ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. N. Patel Association of Manufacturers of Petroleum Speciali- 

ties, Bombay 

Shri K. K. Neyogi ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Ramaohandran Brakes India Ltd, Madras 

Shri P. Krishnamoorthy ( Alternate ) 
Representative Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Shri B. Sanghavi Indian Oil Corporation Ltd ( Marketing Division ), 

Bombay 

Shri B. Laxminarayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. N. SavaHt Petrosil Oil Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. A. Paes ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. Sethuramiah Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra Dun 

Shki S. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. B. Shrivastava Tide Water Oil Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. Naik ( Alternate I ) 

Shri N. C. Mittal ( Alternate II ) 
Shri D. K. Singh Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri G. Achutarajvtaiah ( Alternate 1 ) 

Shri B. S. Srivastava ( Alternate II ) 
Shri G. P. Singh Steel Authority of India Limited ( Bokaro Steel 

Plant ), Bokaro Steel City 

Shri A. K. Misra ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. P. Sirpal Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 

Shri A. P. Goel ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. D, Srivastava Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

ShriRajendra Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri T .V. Varghese Madras Refineries Ltd, Madras 

Shri P. C. D. G. Samuel ( Alternate ) 



13 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
Base Units 



QXJANTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermod y nam ic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candeia 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








QUA2TTITY 


Unit 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = 1 kg.m/s^ 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J - 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W==lJ/s 


FJux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.s 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T - 1 Wb/m2 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-^> 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


I S - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V - I \V/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m2 



