**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10260-1 (1982) : Terms, definitions and classification of 
plain bearings. Part I: Construction [PGD 13: Bearing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62V822'5-i22*ooi'4 IS : 10260 ( Part i ) - 1982 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

TERMS, DEFINITIONS 
AND CLASSIFICATION OF PLAIN BEARING 

PART I CONSTRUCTION 



1. Scope — Covers the most commonly used terms with their definitions and classification, applied 
to construction of plain bearings- 

1 .1 For some of the terms and word-combinations their short forms are given which are recommended 
for use when they are unambiguous. Self-explanatory terms are given without definitions, 

2. General Terms 

2.1 Bearing — A support or a guide by means of which a moving part is located with respect to other 
parts of a mechanism. 

2.2 P/ain Bearing — A support or a guide in which only sliding friction takes place. 

2.2.1 Thici< walled tialf bearing — k bearing liner having sufficiently thick wall to enable it to 
withstand the imposed leads without distortion. The bearing is sufficiently rigid and does not deform 
to take the shape of the housing into which it is fitted. 

2.2.2 Thin walled bearing — k bearing liner which has the ability to take the shape of the housing 
into which it is fitted for the geometrical truth of the working surface that is bearing bore. 

2.3 Plain Bearing Unit — Type of a tribological system including a plain bearing. 

3. Types of Plain Bearings 

3.1 Plain bearings are the folFowing types 

3.1 .1 According to the direction of the supported load : 

a) Journal bearing, 

b) Thrust bearing, and 

c) Thrust-journal plain bearing. 

3.1 .2 According to the type of lubrication i 

a) Aerodynamic bearing, 

b) Aerostatic bearing, 

c) Hydrodynamic bearing, 

d) Hydrostatic bearing, 

e) Bearing with solid lubricant/ and 

f) Uniubricated bearing. 

3.1.3 According to the design : 

a) Plain self-aligning bearing, 

b) Tilting pad journal bearing, 

c) Pad thrust bearing, 

d) Pad journal bearing, 

e) Tilting pad thrust bearing 

f) Lobed plain bearing, 

g) Self-lubricating bearing, 
h) Porous bearing, and 

j) Porous self lubricating bearing. 



Adopted 12 June 1982 



June 1983, ISI 



6r2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR6 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: ie260(Partl)- 1982 

3.2 Plain Journal Bearing (Journal Bearing) —Plain bearing in which the load acts in a radial 
direction with respect to the axis of rotation. 

3.3 Plain Thrust Bearing ( Thrust Bearing ) — Plain bearing in which the load acts along or parallel 
to the axis of rotation. 

3.4 Thrust Journal Plain Bearing — Plain bearing in which the load acts in both the axial and radial 
directions. 

3.5 Aerodynamic Bearing — Plain bearing designed for operation under the conditions of aerodyna- 
mic lubrication. 

Z>^ Aerostatic Bearing — ?\d\x\hQax\nq designed for operation under the conditions of aerostatic 
lubrication^ 

2J Hydrodynamic Bearing — Plain bearing designed for operation under purely hydrodynamic 
lubrication conditions. 

3.8 Hydrostatic Bearing — Plain bearing designed for operation under hydrostatic lubrication 
conditions. 

3.9 Bearing with Solid Lubricant — Plain bearing designed for operation with solid lubricant, 

3.10 Unlubricated Bearing — Plain bearing in which the relatively moving parts slide without preli- 
minary applied lubricant. 

3.1^ Plain Self Aligning Bearing — Plain bearing the design of which provides for self-allanment 
of a liner with respect to the opposing surface. 

3A2 Pad Journal Bearing — Plain journal bearmg the bearing surface of which consists of several 
pads. 

3.13 Pad Thrust Bearing — Plain thrust bearing the bearing surface of which consists of several pads. 

3^4 Tilting Pad Journal Bearing — Plain journal bearing the bearing surface of which consists of 
several pads and each of them is free to align with respect to the opposing working surface of journal 
under the action of hydrodynamic ( aerodynamic ) pressure or load. 

3AB Tilting Pad Thrust Bearing — Plain thrust bearing the bearing surfaces of which consist of 
several pads each of which is free to align with respect to the opposing working surface under the 
action of hydrodynamic ( aerodynamic ) pressure or load. 

3A^ Lobed Plain Bearing ( Lobed Bearing ) — Plain journal bearing in which several hydrodynamic 
wedges are developed round its periphery during operation, which is achieved with a special shape 
of the sliding surface. 

3A1 Self-lubricating Bearing — Plain bearing lubricated by means of the bearing material and of 
bearing material components like grease, solid and fluid lubricants. 

3.18 Porous Bearing — Plain bearing ( bearing bush ) made from sintered bearing material the pores 
of which may be filled with a lubricant. 

3.19 Porous Self-lubricating Bearing — Porous bearing with pores filled with a lubricant accessible 
from the surface. 

4. Structural Elements of Plain Bearings 

4.1 Journal — Portion of a shaft ( axis ) supported by a plain journal bearing, 

4.2 Thrust Collar — Detail connected with a shaft or a part of a shaft supported by a plain thrust 
bearing anti transmitting the load acting in the direction of the axis. 

4.3 Plain Bearing Housing (Bearing Housing ) — Housing into which a liner ( a bush ) is fitted. 

4.4 Plain Bearing Liner, Bearing Liner, Liner, Insert Liner — ^B^\aQed\:>\B part of a plain bearing, the 
inner surface of which is a rubbing surface. 

4.5 Plain Bearing Bush, Bearing Bush, Bush — Tubular element of one piece plain journal bearing, 
the inner surface of which is the bearing bore. 

4.6 Wrapped Bush — It is a cylindrical bearing, having a continuous split from one end to the other, 
manufactured from rolled material. This split may or may not be parallel to the axis of the cylinder. 
In its free stage, the wrapped bush may not be perfectly cylindrical, and its split may be open. The 
split Is closed when the wrapped bush is fitted in housing. 



IS: l0260(Partl)- 1982 

4.7 Flangad Bearing Liner (Basil), Flanged Liner ( Basil ) — Plain bearing liner ( busli ) with a 
flange at one or both ends. 

4.8 Thrast Wasiier — Aviuular plate usually used with a plain journal bearing, to support axial load. 

4.9 Thrast Haif-Wasiier— Part of a plate which, if combined with another similar part, forms a thrust 
washer. 

4.10 Piajn Bearing Half Liner, Bearing Half Liner, Half Liner— Part of a plain bearing liner extend- 
ing 180"* around the journal which, if combined with another similar part, forms a complete 
plain bearing. 

4.11 So/id Liner (Basil) — Plain bearing liner ( bush ) made of one material. 

4.12 i[ilaitiiayer Bearing Liner {Maltilayer Liner ) — P\a\n bearing liner made of layers of different 
materials. 

^AZ Bearing Liner Backing, Liner Backing, Backing — Layer in a multilayer bearing liner with a 
bearing alloy applied on It that gives the bearing the required strength and/or stiffness. 

4.14 Bearing Anti-Friction Layer, Anti-Friction Layer — Layer of a bearing material in a multilayer liner. 

4.15 Overlay Plating^ An extra layer of soft metal (such as Lead-tin, and Lead- tin-Copper) over, 
what would otherwise be the sliding surface of bearing liner. The thickness of such soft layer 
is usually 0'025 mm and does not exceed 0'1 mm. 

4.16 Flasiiing Layer— A very thin flash of pure tin or lead-tin applied to finished bearing as an 
protective anti-corrosive layer. The thickness of such flash which is electrolytically deposited, 
usually does not exceed one. 

4.17 Bimetal ( T ri- metal ) Bearing Liner — A multilayer bearing liner made of two ( or three ) metals 
or alloys. 

4.18 IVlicro Bearing Liner — A bearing liner in which the white-metal lining thickness is too thin 
( usually below 0*175 mm ) to give them extra fatigue strength. 

4.19 Pre-finisiied Bearing Uner ( Bush ) — AprQ'V\x\\shedbear\nn Mner (bush) is one which can be 
fitted to the housing and used without further scrapping or machining. 

4.20 Lin-bored Bearing Liner ( Basil ) — An un-bored bearing liner (bush) is one that has to be 
bored/machined to the required size by user in order to use it in assembly. 

4.21 Semi-Finisiied or Line Bored Bearing Liner ( Basiies ) — bearing liners (bushes) which are 
semi-machined and the machining allowance so kept is suitable for reaming, burnishing, broaching 
or line boring for using in an assembly. The machining allowance for such bearing liners (bushes) 
is less than that for un-bored bearing liners ( bushes ). 

5. Dimensional Characteristics of Plain Bearings 

5.1 Gauge Diameter — Maximum diameter of bearing housing. 

5.2 Plain Journal Bearing inside Diameter— Diameter of a sliding surface of a plain journal bearing. 

5.3 Bearing Spread— Outside dimension across parting line when measured in the free state. 

5.4 Bearing Crusii — Amount of peripheral length of half bearing which exceeds one-half of the 
circumference of the high limit bore, measured under specified load. 

5.5 Eccentricity — A gradual reduction in bearing wall thickness from centre of bearing half to parting 
line relief creating additional theoretical clearance between bearing and journal to allow for bore 
distortion created by bearing crush and load deflection. 

5 6 Parting Line ( Joint Face ) — The contacting surfaces between the two mating bearing halves. 

5.7 Parting Line Heigiit ( Joint Face Height ) — Dmenslon from plane of parting line to outside 
radius of b'ack at centTe of bearing with me^asured under load as specified by manufacturer. 

5.8 Parting Line Relief (Joint Face Relief) — Moderate reduction in wall thickness adjacent to part- 
ing line to allow lubricant flow and prevent scrapping of oil film on journal as also to allow for bore 
distortion created by bearing crush. 

5.9 Bearing Liner ( Bush ) Width, Liner ( Bush ) Width — Overall dimension of a bearing liner ( bush ) 
measured axially. 



IS: 10260 (Parti)- 

5.10 Diametral Plain Journal Bearing Clearance, Journal Bearing Clearance, Clearance — Difference 
between the inside diameter of the plain journal bearing bore and the diameter of the journal. 

Note — A diametral plain journal bearing clearance may be either "calculated** or*'actuar. 

5.11 Bearing Wall Thickness — 1oXb\ thickness of bearing half which is the sum of back thickness, 
lining thickness and overlay thickness. 

5.12 Straddle Gage— Inside dimension between flanges of a double flanged thrust bearing which is 
also referred to as "bar gage". 

5.13 Locating Notch — A recess in the bearing housing bore provided to receive the locating lug 
of bearing. 

5.14 Locating Lug (Locating Nick) — The projection at the joint face/parting line of a half liner 
provided to locate it during assembly, in the bearing housing. The locating lug is not meant to 
prevent rotation. 

5.15 Locating Dowel Hole — When there is no provision of locating lug or nick in the bearing, dowel 
holes are provided to locate it during assembly, in the bearing housing. 

5.16 Locating Ear — A projection on a thrust washer for locating it in the housing. 

5.17 Locating Slot — A recess in the side of the bearing housing provided to receive the locating ear 
of a thrust washer. 

6. Special Materials for Plain Bearings and Their Properties 

6.1 Anti-Friction Material ( Bearing l\/laterial) — Material possessing a complex of special properties 
providing for its use in plain bearings. 

6.2 Sintered Bearing Material — Material made from compressed or sintered powders suited for use 
in plain bearings. 

6.3 Frictional Compatibility (Compatibility ) — Ability of a bearing material to prevent adhesion with 
the material of the shaft during friction. 

6.4 Frictional Conformability ( Conformability ) — AbWWy of a bearing material to compensate for 
unsatisfactory initial adjusting to the mating surface by elastic and plastic deformation of the layer. 

6.5 Embeddability — Ability of a bearing material to provide for embedding of hard particles to reduce 
their scoring or abrasion action. 

6.6 Running in Ability — Ability of a bearing material to reduce friction force, temperature and wear 
intensity during running in. 

6.7 Wear Resistance -- AhWliy of a material to resist wear under specified friction conditions, ex- 
pressed as the reciprocal of the wear rate of the wear intensity. 

6.8 Relative Wear Resistance — Ratio of wear resistances of two bearing materials when they wear 
under similar conditions. 

Note — Usually one of the materials Is referred to as a standard material. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The Content of this standard was earlier mostly covered in IS; 4757-1968 'Dimensions for 
wrapped bushes and thrust washers' and IS : 4774-1 968 Thin-walled bearing and thrust half-washers'. 
On the basis of the current international practices, the concerned committee felt the necessity to 
bring out a separate standard on Plain Bearing terminology to make it in line with ISO/DIS 4378/1 
'Plain bearing vocabulary — Part 1 — Construction' ISO/DIS 4378/2 'Plain Bearing — Vocabulary 
Part 2 — Friction and wear' and ISO/DIS 4378/3 'Plain Bearing — Vocabulary Part 3 — Lubrication' 
issued by the International Organisation for Standardization. The standard consists of the following 
parts : 

IS : 10260 ( Part I ) - 1982 Terms, definitions and classifications of plain bearing ; Part 1 Construction 

IS : 10260 ( Part II ) - 1982 Terms, definitions and classifications of plain bearing : Part II Friction 

and wear 

IS ; 10260 ( Part III ) - 1982 Terms, definitions and classifications of plain bearing : Part III Lubrication 
These standards have been prepared for the guidance of the manufacturers and consumers to 
assist them for the correct interpretation of the terminology related to the plain bearings. 



Printed at D«lhl PrlnUrt. Delhi. India 



