**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12629 (1989) : Water well drilling - Rotary hose for 
rotary drilling - Recommended practice for care and use 
[MED 21: Diamond Core and Waterwell Drilling] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 12629 : 1989 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



vHcHcJT^M ^[^ - %^ f^feFT c^ fen? ^fefT ^Trf 

Indian Standard 

WATER WELL DRILLING — ROTARY HOSE 

FOR ROTARY DRILLING — RECOMMENDED 

PRACTICE FOR CARE AND USE 

( First Reprint DECEMBER 1 996 ) 



UDC 622.243.5 : 621.643.3 



© BIS 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1989 Price Group 2 



Diamond Core and Water- Well Drilling Sectional Committee, EDC 88 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 28 February 1983, after the 
draft finalized by the Diamond Core and Water- Well Drilling Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

General requirements for rotary hose for water-well drilling equipment are covered in IS 12214 : 1987 
'General requirements for rotary hose for water-well drilling equipment'. This standard is intended 
to provide guidelines for care and use of rotary hose particularly in field applications. 

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from API Spec 7 - 1985 
*API Specification for rotary drilling equipment' issued by the American Petroleum Institute, USA. 



IS 12629 : 1989 



Indian Standard 



WATER WELL DRILLING - ROTARY HOSE 

FOR ROTARY DRILLING - RECOMMENDED 

PRACTICE FOR CARE AND USE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the recommended 
practice for care and use of rotary hose for rotary 
drilling. 

2 RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 

2.0 In order that the rotary hose provides the 
expected performance for its expected and safe 
\\k, following practice for its use is recommended, 

2.1 Hose Length 

In order to avoide kinking of hose, the length of 
hose and height of stand pipe shall be such that 
while raising or lowering, as in making mousehole 
connections, the hose shall have a normal bending 
radius at the swivel when the hose is in its lowest 
drilling position and at the standpipe when the 
hose is in its highest drilling position. The 
recommended length of hose is given by the 
following equation ( see Fig. 1 ) : 



Lh 



^ +-/? + 



where 

Lh ~ length of hose, in m; 

Lx = length of hose travel, in m; 

R = minimum radius of bending of hose, 
in m; and 

S ~ allowance for contraction Lh due to 
maximum recommended working pres- 
sure, in m ( may be taken, if not 
otherwise specified, as 0"3 metre for 
all sizes of hose ). 

2.2 Stand pipe Height 

The recommended standpipe height is given by 
the following equation ( see Fig. 1 ): 

where 
Hs = vertical height of standpipe, in m; 
Lt = length of hose travel, in m; and 



Z = height, in m, from the top of the 
derrick floor to the end of hose at the 
swivel when the swivel is in its lowest, 
drilling position. 

NOTE — When the actual length of hose is greater 
than the length calculated in 2.1, the standpipe 
height shall be increased by one-half the difference 
between the actual length and the calculated length. 

2.3 Hose Connections 

The threaded connection on rotary hose shall be 
capable of handling the rated pressure and shall 
not be welded to its connector as this shall damage 
the hose. The connection between the rotary 
hose, standpipe and swivel shall be consistent 
with the design worJcing pressure of the system. 
The connections attaching the hose to the swivel 
and to the standpipe shall be as nearly tangential 
as possible. The use of a compatible connection 
on the swivel gooseneck shall ensure this relation- 
ship at the top of the hose. It is recommended 
that a 180'' gooseneck be used on standpipe 
connection if the standpipe is vertical. A 160° 
gooseneck shall be used if the standpipe has the 
same slope as the derrick leg. 

2.4 Handling 

In order to minimize the danger of kinking, the 
hose shall preferably be removed from its crate 
by hand, laid out in a straight line and then lifted 
by means of catline attached near one end of the 
hose. If a catline is used to remove the hose 
from its crate, the crate shall be rotated as the 
hose is removed. The use of a carrier to protect 
the hose in moving to a new location is recom- 
mended practice. It is considered bad practice 
to handle hose with a winch, to hang the hose 
from a truck gin pole, or to place heavy pieces 
of equipment on the hose. 

2.5 Twisting 

Hose shall not be intentionally back twisted. 
Twisting is sometimes employed to force the 
swivel bail out of the way. This places injurious 
stresses in the structural members of the hose 
body because one spiral of reinforcing wires is 
opened and the other is tightened, thus reducing 
the resistance of the hose to bursting and kinking. 
In order to prevent twisting, it is suggested that 



1 



IS 12629 : 1989 



HIGHEST OPERATING PQSITinM 



LENGTH 

OF 

HOSE TRAVEL 



LOWEST OPERATING POSITION 



TOP OF 



ORiLUNG FLOOR 




Fig. 1 Layout for Rotary Hose 
2 



IS 12629 : 1989 



a straiglit swivel be installed on one end of the 
hose. Each length of hose has a longitudinal lay 
line of a dififerent colour than the hose cover. 
This shall be used as a guide in making certain 
that the hose is installed in a straight position. 

2»6 Clearance 

The hose installation shall be such as to give 
adequate clearance between the hose and the 
derrick or mast. 

1.1 Safety Chain 

All rotary and vibrator hoses 2'5 m or longer, 
shall have safety clamps installed at the locations 
specified, but such clamps shall not necessarily be 
installed by the hose manufacturer. The hose 
manufacturer shall mark the hose to indicate 
the location at which safety clamps shall be 
installed. The safety clamps, clevis, and chain 
shall have a minimum breaking strength 
of 72'5 kN and the clamp shall incorporate 
a 28'6 mm minimum diameter hole for 
attaching clevis/chain and will be so designed as 
to allow adequate clearance from the hose. The 
clamp shall be of the proper size and shall be 
tightened securely but not to such an extent 
as to injure the hose or reduce the inside bore 
diameter. In the case of rotary hose, the safety 
chain shall be attached to a derrick upright at 
the standpipe end rather than a transverse girt, 
so that the chain shall be free to move upward, 
without restricting the movement of the hose, if 
the travelling block is raised too high. 

2.8 Vibration and Pulsation 

Continual flexing is injurious to rotary hose and 
reduces its service life. Surge chambers and 
pulsation dampeners of the proper size shall be 
used in the mud line after the pumps to minimize 
the vibration in the mud lines and hose. The 
pulsation dampener shall be set at 10 percent of 
the maximum pump pressure. The lines on the 
suction side of the pump shall be pre-charged or 
operated with a flooded suction. The use of 
suction hose is recommended to minimize pulsa- 
tion. 

2.9 Working Temperature 

Working temperature shall not exceed 80°C. High 
temperatures in combination with abrasive condi- 
tions encountered in drilling shall be avoided. 

2.10 Working Pressure 

The recommended maximum working pressure 
for rotary hose is one-half of the specified test 
pressure. Working pressure includes the pressure 
surges that occur in the system. 



2.11 Field Test Pressure 

Field testing of rotary hose when required for 
establishing periodic safety levels of continued 
operation, shall be conducted with these factors 
as a guide: 

a) Visual inspection shall include examination 
of any external damage to the body, end 
structure, and couplings. Safety chain 
shall be checked and properly attached for 
complete safety compliance. 

b) All back twist shall be provided. 

c) Hose to be suspended in normal unstressed 
position from standpipe to swivel. 

d) Rate of pressure rise not less than 6*9 MPa 
nor greater than 69 MPa per minute. 

e) Permissible test medium: mud, oil, or water 
with precaution that all air be bled off. 

f ) Duration of test pressure limit not to 
exceed 10 minutes. 

g) Field test pressure not to exceed VIS times 
the maximum rated working pressure. 

h) Field testing to be conducted under full 
responsibility of the user. 

NOTE — Because the manufacturers tend to use 
higher test pressures on delivery ( in excess of 34*5 
MPa ), it shall be understood that field testing 
recommendations are limited to a maximum test 
pressure of 1*25 times the maximum rated working 
pressure regardless of the delivery test pressure 
involved. 

2.12 Operating Limits 

Operating personnel shall be advised as to the 
highest and the lowest drilling positions, length 
of standpipe, etc, for which the hose was selected 
and drilling operations shall be carried out within 
such limits. 

2.13 After-Coolers 

Air or gas compressors shall always be equipped 
with after- coolers to lower the temperature to 
tolerable limits. When after-coolers are not used, 
air or gas entering the hose is at excessively high 
temperature. The hose inner liner is aged at an 
accelerated rate thus reducing resistance to 
abrasion. 

NOTE — When used hoses are recoupled, or when 
used rotary drilling hoses are cut and recoupled to 
make vibrator hoses, any certification mark and the 
original manufacturer's label shall be removed. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act. 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No: EDC 88 ( 5085 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No, Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 83 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI -110002 I 323 3H 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 \ 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 / 60 38 43 

20 25 



f 60 3^ 
[ 60 2( 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MaroK Andheri (East) J 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAl" 400093 1 832 78 91,832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



