**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14592-1 (1998) : Planning and Design of Barrage Power 
Houses - Guidelines, Part 1: Investigation, Planning and 
Layout [WRD 22: River Training and Diversion Works] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

Indian Standard 

PLANNING AND DESIGN OF BARRAGE 
POWER HOUSES — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 INVESTIGATION, PLANNING AND LAYOUT 



ICS 27.140 



© BIS 1998 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1998 Price Group 4 



Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee, RVD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee had been approved by River Valley Division Council. Hydro- 
electric power is the most easily available renewable source of energy, not depending on any non-renewable 
inputs like coal, petroleum or nuclear fuels. It does not cause any pollution to the atmosphere. Once a hydro- 
project is established, little running and maintenance cost is involved. India, having been blessed with considerable 
rainfall and extensive snow-clad mountains, has very good potential for hydroelectric power generation. 

Hydro-electnc power can be generated along a river mainly by three different methods namely: 

a) By constructing high dam to create a reservoir, with power house at the toe of dam or an a long/ 
short water — conductor system, 

b) By constructing a low diversion structure and a water conductor system leading to a power house, 
and 

c) By constructing one or cascade of barrages with a power houses on the down stream river bed or 
on a short diversion channels using the run-off from the river with relatively small storage. 

Sometimes the barrages constructed for irrigation can also generate hydro-electric power as a secondary 
benefit, if a constant flow can be passed down the barrage for downstream requirements. 

This code deals with the barrage power houses [alternate (c) above]. In this type of power houses energy 
can be generated during a major part of the year. Reduced generation is also available during medium flood 
stage. During the high flood period in the river, if the difference between the upstream and the downstream 
water level reduces to less than 2 m, it is desirable to stop power generation. Thus for a very short period 
these power houses may not generate any power, during which time, the annual repair or maintenance of 
the machines can be carried out. 

Only general guidelines giving investigation, planning and layout requirements of the power houses combined 
with barrages are dealt with in this standard. 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 



Indian Standard 



PLANNING AND DESIGN OF BARRAGE 
POWER HOUSES — GUIDELINES 

PART 1 INVESTIGATION, PLANNING AND LAYOUT 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers investigation, planning and 
layout of barrage hydro-electric power houses. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts 
to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

29 1 4 : 1 964 Recommendations for estimation of 
discharge by establishing stage- 
discharge relation in open channel 

4247 Code of jpractice for structural 

(Part 1): 1993 design of surface hydel power 

stations: Part 1 Data for design 

(second revision) 

6966 Guidelines for hydraulic design of 

(Part 1) : 1989 barrages and weirs: Part i Alluvial 
reaches {first revision) 

7720 : 1991 Criteria for investigation, planning 
and layout of barrages and weirs 
(first revision) 

10060: 1981 Code of practice for subsurface 
investigation for power house sites 

1 2800 Guidelines for selection of turbines, 

(Part 3): 1991 preliminary dimensioning and 

layout of surface hydro-electric 

power house: Part 3 Small, mini 

and micro power houses 

3 INVESTIGATION AND DATA COLLECTION 

As soon as project is taken up for consideration, 
detailed investigations shall be carried out for 
planning, design and financial evaluation of the 
proposed barrage power houses, to get the following 
data which is essential: 

a) Topographical 

1) Index map showing the catchment area 
upstream of the proposed barrage axis, 
covering important irrigation systems, power 
projects, villages and towns, roads and railway 
networks, gauge and discharge sites, and 
rainfall observation sites in the neighbourhood. 

2) Contour plan, of the area, both in river bed 
and banks in and around the barrage and 
powerhouse sites on a suitable scale, with 
contour intervals of not more than 0.5 m, 
covering the proposed barrage abutments, 



approach channel, intake structure, power 
hoiise, water conductor system (only for by- 
pass power house), switchyard (substation), 
tailrace, bank protection area, colony, 
construction plant and machinery yard, storage 
godowns, etc. The distances to be covered 
on the country side on either sides of the 
bank and on the upstream and downstream 
sides of the barrage axis may be decided on 
the basis of the size of the project and 
topography of the area. Normally contours 
up to 2.5 m above HFL and up to 5 km on 
the upstream and downstream of barrage axis 
would be desirable. 

3) Cross-sections of the river at the proposed 
axis at intervals of 200 m, both on the upstream 
and downstream up to at least 1 km from the 
proposed axis. A plan of the river shall be 
prepared showing the bank lines, spot levels 
and locations at all the above cross-sections. 

4) Longitudinal sections of the river connecting 
the lowest water levels, average bed levels 
and the bank lines normally from 5 km 
upstream to 3 km downstream of the proposed 
axis. 

5) In case the power house is to be on a by- 
pass channel, longitudinal section along the 
channel alignment from the intake end to the 
tail end, with ground levels, ground water 
levels, proposed channel bed levels, full supply 
level, and maximum and minimum river water 
levels at both ends of the channel. 

b) Hydrological 

1) Daily stage and discharge data of the river 
at or near the proposed axis for at least 5 
years. A stage and discharge observation site 
shall be established at the proposed barrage 
axis, if not already existing, as soon as the 
project proposal is initiated. Two more stage 
observation sites, one on the upstream and 
one on the downstream, are to be established. 
All the sites are to be connected to G.T.S 
Bench Marks. Stage and discharge 
observations are to be made according to IS 
2914. If discharge data are available at distant 
upstream or downstream established gauging 
sites, over a number of years, the flow at the 
proposed site may be estimated by developing 
statistical correlation between the two sites. 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

2) Information regarding high flood level, from 
flood marks and from local enquiry. 

3) 10-daily irrigation withdrawals, at the proposed 
barrage, if any. 

4) Gauge (stage) and discharge relation curve up 
to the design flood, based on data of at least 
5-years, but preferably by observations and 
acceptable extrapolation. 

c) Meteorological 

1) Daily rainfall data from all the rainfall 
gauging stations in and around the catchment 
area, for as many years as possible. 

2) Monthly maximum and minimum 
temperatures of the river water and of the 
ambient air. 

3) Average monthly rainfall at the site and 
maximum intensities. 

4) Maximum value and direction of wind 
velocity at the site. 

5) Maximum depth of snowfall, if any. 

d) Sedimentation 

Bed load and suspended load concentration 
during high and low flow conditions along with 
gradation analysis and abrasive characteristics. 

e) Geological 

1) 'Log of drill holes samples up to 10-15 m 
for alluvial river beds and up to 5 m for rocky 
beds, below the deepest foundation level, 
depending on the geological condition. 

Holes shall be drilled at 15 m centre to centre 
staggered all over the proposed site of the 
power house and approach and tail channel. 

2) Properties of the soil and rock samples of 
different strata encountered in the drill hole. 



3) Geological sections of all the strata existing 
below the river bed, as revealed from the above 
explorations. 

4) Geophysical characteristics, for example, 
solution cavities, seams, bedding planes, 
possibility of rock fall, etc. 

5) Permeability characteristics of the soil and the 
rocky formations at different depths. 

6) Load test and dynamic characteristics of the 
foundation strata below the power house and 
the intake. 

7) Standard penetration tests at intervals of 30 
m and up to depth of 10 m below piers and 
abutment. 

8) Coefficient of friction between concrete and 
soil or rock and cohesion or unit shear strength 
under dry and submerged conditions along 
the foundation planes of the power house and 
of the barrage bays. If weak shear zones and 
bedding planes exist below the proposed 
foundation levels, the above characteristics 
shall be obtained also, along these weaker 
planes. For preliminary design, the values 
given in Table 1 may be used. 

Seismological 

Maximum seismic acceleration (vertical and 
horizontal) and direction as shown by the 
seismograph situated nearest to the site. 

g) Ground Water 

1) In case the proposed power house is to be 
located in a by-pass channel, ground water 
levels along the proposed channel alignment 
and the power house site, immediately after 
the monsoon and during the dry weather. 

2) The subsoil water table in the region in general, 
h) Backfill Material 

Physical characteristics like, cohesion, angle of 



Table 1 Values of Unit Shear Strength and Coefficients of Friction 

[Clause 3(e)(8)] 



SI 


Material 


No. 




i) 


Rock (massive and structurally sound) 


ii) 


Concrete 


iii) 


Rock (fractured, jointed) 


iv) 


Gravel 


v) 


Sand 


vi) 


Clay (firm) 


vii) 


Clay (soft) 



Unit Shear 

Strength C, 

N/mm 2 


Coefficient of 
Friction 


3 


0.80 


3 


0.80 


0.7 


0.60 





0.50 





0.40 


0.07 


0.30 


0.02 


0.20 



friction, density and permeability of the backfill 
material to be placed behind the abutments of 
the barrage and the power house and to be used 
in the guide banks and the approach embank- 
ments. 

j) Construction Material 

1) Physical characteristics, suitability, available 
quantity, lead distances and lift heights of 
stone and sand aggregates for concrete from 
different possible sources. 

2) Aikali-aggregate reaction test results of 
aggregate. 

3) Boulders for pitching on the upstream and 
downstream aprons of the barrage, guide bank, 
etc. 

4) Suitable filter material for guide bank slope 
and toe protection, and barrage apron 
protection. 

k) Financial 

1) Cost of suitable construction materials 
including transportation up to the construction 
site, crushing, screening, etc. 

2) Costs of turbines, generators, various electrical 
and mechanical equipment, cranes, switchyard 
equipment, pumps, barrage gates, power house 
valves, etc, of the required sizes and 
specifications including transportation up to 
the site. 

3) Cost of the transmission system including 
poles, cables, transformers, etc, up to the 
nearest grid line, if it is to be connected to 
the grid. Otherwise, cost of the local 
distribution network, transmission system and 
feeder lines. 

m) Fish Growth 

1) Existing migratory characteristics of the fish 
available, their sizes and species. 

2) Need of fish-ladder and type of fish-ladder 
suitable for the fish. 

3) Possibility of utilizing the barrage pond for 
pisci-culture. 

n) Navigation 

i) Existing boat plying system in the river. 

2) Number of boats crossing the site daily, 
monthly, etc. 

3) Possibility of developing an inland waterway 
by constructing a series or cascade of barrages 
as additional utility other than power genera- 
tion. 



IS 14592 (Part I) : 1998 

4) Demand in the region for river transportation, 
sizes of boats to ply, size of navigation lock 
necessary, etc. 

p) Irrigation Needs 

1 ) Possible demand by existing agricultural areas 
which can be irrigated by gravity from the 
barrage pond. 

2) Possible irrigation demand in monsoon season, 

3) Possible demand by areas where pump 
irrigation system may be introduced by lifting 
from the pond. 

4) Area which may be served by tube well 
irrigation, using the power generated at the 
barrage power house. 

5) Approximate revenue expected. 

q) Environmental 

The following aspects to be quantified as far 
as possible: 

1) Unfavourable Aspects 

i) Number of villages getting submerged or 
water-logged, 

ii) Number of people getting affected fully 
or partially, 

iii) Agricultural land getting affected, 

iv) Adverse effect on forest and wildlife, 

v) Adverse effect on fish in the river, and 

vi) Effects on plying of boats. 

2) Favourable Aspects 

i) Reduction in forest destruction for 
firewood due to availability of eiectriciiy. 

ii) Development of Pisci-culture by village 
cooperatives. 

iii) Rise in the ground water table, thereby 
improving the drinking water facilities in 
the neighbouring villages. 

iv) Drinking water facility from the pond for 
wild life and domestic animals. 

v) Improvement in the transportation facility 
in the neighbourhood due to the bridge 
over the barrage. 

vi) Sport and recreation facilities. 

vii) Tourist attraction. 

viii) Reduction of landslide in the hilly region 
due to reduction in toe scour because of 
ponded water. 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

4 PLANNING AND LAYOUT 

4.1 It is generally advantageous to locate a power 
house at a barrage close to a dam situated on the 
upstream, which will ensure a continuous flow 
throughout the year. Rivers having appreciable flow, 
even at the minimum, are also preferred locations, 

4.2 In rivers with appreciable minimum flows barrage 
power house may prove attractive. 

4.3 The power houses are to be located preferably 
near the end bays and not at the centre of the barrage 
(see Fig. 1). 

4.4 It is necessary to locate the axis of the barrage 



in such a way that, a natural deep channel exists on 
the bank where the power house is proposed. 

4.5 Rivers carrying abrasive coarse sand, stones and 
floating logs would require sediment exclusion devices 
and adequate trash rack arrangements. 

4.6 Tho power house can also be located in a bye- 
pass channel cut through the bank and a sediment 
excluder provided at the mouth of the channel (see 
Fig. 2). 

4J Suitable arrangements shall be provided across 
the entrance channel to divert the rolling stones 
and coarse bed sand to the adjacent undersluice 
bays, if the power house is located in the river bed 
itself. 




UNDER SLUICE BAYS 



RIVER 
POWER HOUSE BAY 



Fig. 1 Typical Barrage Power House in River Bed 

4 



4.8 If the canal head regulator and the river power 
house are located on the same end of the barrage, 
their operations are to be properly synchronized. It 
may be possible to construct one common sediment 
excluder for both of them (see Fig. 3). 

4.9 In flat and wide rivers, necessary storage may 
be available in the pond for diurnal peaking, if the 
barrage gates are kept slightly higher than the Full 
Reservoir Level. 

4.10 During high flood, when the barrage power houses 
are shut down due to low head difference, sediments 
may deposit and form shoals in the approach and 
tail channels. Such condition is to be tested in 3 
dimensional models and preventive measures like long 
divide walls, etc, to be provided in the design. 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

4.11 In alluvial rivers, the approach and exit velocities 
into and from the power house shall be restricted 
to the limit of river bed scouring. 

4.12 Suitable training walls and river bank protection 
measures are to be decided after model studies. 

4.13 The road bridge, if provided across the diversion 
channel shall preferably be located between 
downstream of the power house and upstream of the 
draft tube gate axis. 

4.14 When a hydro-power scheme is to be introduced 
in an existing barrage, the power house can be located 
by replacing one of the weir bays if the waterway 
is not adversely affected. Otherwise, it can be located 
in one of the barrage abutments. If neither of the 




HEAD REGULATOR 



SERVICF BAY 



Fig. 2 Typical Barrage Power House in Bye-Pass Channel 

5 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

two is possible, the power house can be constructed 
by replacing a portion of the barrage embankment. 
If none of the above alternatives is feasible, a longer 
water conductor through the bank, even by construc- 
ting a short tunnel may be provided (see Fig. 4). 

5 HYDROLOGICAL STUDIES 

5.1 Power potential studies are to be carried out 
either from actually observed or from the developed 
10 daily discharge data. The power studies may 
include preparation of monthly energy tables, 
obtaining the pattern of power generation and 
corresponding energy in the 90 percent dependable 
year for different installation and determining the 



optimum installation for the proposed scheme. 

5.2 Design flood for the barrage has to be very 
carefully calculated after obtaining actual observed 
high flood discharges in the river for at least 5 years. 
For preparing a feasibility report, a simulated design 
flood can be used from the meteorological observations 
in the neighbourhood and also using catchment 
characteristics for surface flow. 

5.3 A 50 year frequency design flood is normally 
adopted for the waterway of the barrage. For the 
freeboard, for approach embankments, guide banks, 
road bridge, etc, a 500 year frequency flood or standard 
projected flood [see IS 6966(Part 1)] may be desirable. 




HEAD REGULATOR 



CROSS REGULATOR 



iHRiGATiON CANAL 



Fig, 3 Typical Barrage Power House in Bye-Pass Combined with Irrigation Canal 

6 



5.4 Irrigation withdrawals from the barrage, where 
it is for multi-purpose use, shall be compiled for at 
least 5 years and average 10 daily withdrawals to be 
computed. 

5.5 During dry weather, with lean inflow into the 
barrage, if peaking of generation is carried out by 
releasing outflow only in certain part of the day, a 
minimum continuous release may be ensured for the 
daily need of the down stream villages. For this, 
environmental studies shall be undertaken. 

6 GEOLOGICAL STUDIES 

6.1 In alluvial bed, standard penetration tests at 
intervals of about 30 m are to be carried out up to 
at least 15 m below the foundation levels to ascertain 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

the bearing capacity. If boulders are present in the 
bed, plate bearing tests will be necessary after 
excavating open pits up to the foundation level, after 
pumping out water from the pit. 

6.2 In rocky bed, logs from the bore holes are to 
be carefully examined while deciding the design 
foundation levels. If the bed rock is not strong enough 
to take the load of the superstructure through individual 
piers and column footings, reinforced concrete raft 
may be provided. 

6.3 If the river bed is composed of predominantly 
fine sand or sandy silt material at the foundation 
level, possibility of liquefaction shall be investigated 
and preventive measures planned. 




UNDER GROUND OR 
SURFACE POWER HOUSE 



Fig. 4 Typical Barrage Power House in Bye-Pass Tunnel 

7 



IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 

6.4 In foundations of alluvial or rocky nature, in- 
situ permeability test has to be carried out while 
drilling bore holes. Groutability tests are also to be 
conducted below the proposed foundation level. 

6.5 The rolling and suspended sand in the stream 
flows has to be petrographically analysed for abrasive 
quality, so that the turbine blades may be suitably 
protected against abrasion. 

6.6 The stone aggregates to be used in the concrete 
shall be tested for alkali- aggregate reaction. 

7 TECHNO-ECONOMIC STUDY 

Techno-economic studies for generation and trans- 
mission shall be carried out considering cost of 
electrical and mechanical equipment and transmission 
lines. 

8 ENVIRONMENTAL AND AESTHETICAL 
ASPECT 

8.1 Low head in-stream power stations are quite 
environment-friendly. It is, however, necessary to 
evaluate the cost of rehabilitation of the people residing 
in villages (cultivated lands and forest lands), if any, 
which may get permanently submerged under the 
pond. It is desirable to construct marginal embank 
ments and ring bunds if possible to save the villages, 
temples, schools, market places, etc, on the river bank 
with proper communication facilities instead of shifting 
them to new places for rehabilitation. 



8.2 Shallow depressions on the country side of marginal 
embankments may become water logged during rainy 
seasons and, as such, adequate provision for pumping 
and drainage channels shall be provided in the estimate. 

If the depressions even otherwise get submerged under 
high flood, these may be allowed to act as flood 
detention basins and need not be protected by the 
marginal embankments. 

8.3 If the barrage and the power house obstruct the 
migration of fish, fish ladder shall be provided. 

8.4 In case an existing navigational facility, even for 
small country boats, is affected, locks or ramps shall 
be constructed. 

8.5 Attempt shall be made to harmonize the architec- 
ture of the power house roof and external appearance 
with the natural surroundings. Huge gantry cranes, if 
exposed, shall be shifted to an inconspicuous position. 

8.6 Villagers shall be encouraged to develop pisci- 
culture in the barrage pond on co-operative basis. 

8.7 Beautiful tourist resorts with boating and fishing 
facilities may be built on the banks of the pond. These 
however, shall be built quite upstream from the barrage 
and the power house. 

8.8 Natural parks with wild life may be developed 
on the banks. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions' 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. RVD 20 (139). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMB AI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



f337 84 99,337 85 61 

1337 86 26,337 9120 

f 60 38 43 
160 20 25 

f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 15 19,235 23 15 

/ 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India 



