**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14921 (2001) : Neurosurgical Implants Marking and 
Packaging of Implantable Neural Stimulators [MHD 7 : 
Neurosurgery Instruments Implants and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14921 : 2001 
ISO 10310:1995 

/nof/an Standard 

NEUROSURGICAL IMPLANTS — MARKING 

AND PACKAGING OF IMPLANTABLE 

NEURAL STIMULATORS 



ICS 11.040.40 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Ju/y 2001 Price Grou P 3 



Neurosurgery Instruments Sectional Committee, MHD 7 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 1 031 : 1 995 'Neurosurgical implants — Marking and 
packaging of implantable neural stimulators 1 issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of 
Neurosurgery Instruments Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital 
Planning Division Council. 

The objective of this standard is to ensure that the neural stimulator (including implant pulse generators 
and implant radio frequency receivers) or component thereof is adequately packaged and that the 
device and packaging are labelled with sufficient information. This information needs to be readily 
available to the clinician and patient so as to facilitate decision-making on such matters as the choice 
of device, the methods of implantation, adjustment and fault diagnosis, and convey user precautions. 

It is recommended that implantable neural stimulators and components are manufactured in 
accordance with the ISO 9000 series of Quality System Standards and under international or national 
good manufacturing practices where these exist. 

The text of above mentioned ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian 
Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words International Standard* appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



IS 14921 : 2001 
ISO 10310 : 1995 



Indian Standard 



NEUROSURGICAL IMPLANTS — MARKING 

AND PACKAGING OF IMPLANTABLE 

NEURAL STIMULATORS 



1 Scope 

This international Standard specifies requirements for 
marking, labelling, packaging and accompanying 
documentation for implantable neural stimulators in- 
tended for stimulation of the nervous system (brain, 
spinal cord, peripheral nerves and adjacent struc- 
tures). 

It also covers implanted or external ancillary compo- 
nents, including the external control and programming 
equipment used for the activation or adjustment of 
neural stimulators. 

This International Standard does not specify indi- 
cations or contraindications for the use of implantable 
neural stimulators; nor does it specify testing or the 
range of normal operating variable parameters. It 
does, however, require that information on these 
matters be included in the documentation ac- 
companying each implant pulse generator, implant RF 
receiver or RF transmitter for use by a clinician for 
treating a specific patient. 



2.3 programmer; controller: Externa! device for 
controlling or adjusting the parameters of a neural 
stimulator system. 

2.4 implant RF receiver: Implantable device, with- 
out its own power source, that can generate pulses 
to stimulate the nervous system using radio- 
frequency (RF) power transmitted to it by a transmit- 
ter and antenna. 

2.5 transmitter; driver box: Portable container, 
having pulse generating and modulating circuits for 
controlling implant RF receivers. 

NOTE 1 The transmitter usually contains a power source. 
It may also contain the antenna. There may be some user- 
accessible controls and some internally adjustable controls. 

2.6 antenna: Transmitting coil or loop intended for 
the activation of implant RF receivers. 

NOTE 2 The antenna is generally intended to be placed 
on, or near, the skin, near the implanted RF receiver. 



2 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the 
following definitions apply. 

2.1 neural stimulator: Device for electrically stimu- 
lating the nervous system (brain, spinal cord, periph- 
eral nerves and adjacent structures), comprising a 
pulse generator and all ancillary components, im- 
planted or external to the body, necessary for its 
function and control. 

2.2 implant pulse generator: Implantable device, 
containing its own power source, that can generate 
electrical pulses to stimulate the nervous system 
continuously or intermittently. 



2.7 cable: Insulated wire or conductor intended to 
connect a transmitter to an antenna, external to the 
body, with or without an integral connector at one or 
both ends. 

NOTE 3 A cable may contain more than one wire or 
conductor. 

2.8 implant lead [extension]: Insulated wire or 
conductor intended to be implanted and to connect 
an implant pulse generator or RF receiver to stimu- 
lation electrodes, with or without an integral connec- 
tor at one or both ends. 

2.9 connector: Separate implantable component in- 
tended to make electrical connections between 
implantable components. 



IS 14921 :2001 
ISO 10310:1995 



2.10 adapter: Component that allows the intercon- 
nection of otherwise electrically or physically incom- 
patible components. 

2.11 (stimulation) electrode: Electrically conduct- 
ing part(s) [usually the termination of an implant 
lead(s)] which is designated to form an interface with 
nervous tissue or body fluid and which carries the 

electrical stimulation current. 

2.12 unit pack: Pack containing a single unit or kit. 

2.13 multiple pack: Pack containing a number of 
unit packs. 

3 Device identification 

3.1 Marking 

The implant pulse generator, implant RF receivers, 
programmers and transmitters shall be permanently 
marked with the following information: 

a) name and/or identifying mark of the manufacturer; 

b) model designation; 

c) serial number or lot number as described in 
5.2 c). 

3.2 Non-invasive identification 

Each implant pulse generator and implant RF receiver 
shall have a means of identifying the manufacturer 
and the model designation of the device non- 
invasive^ after implantation. 

4 Packaging 

4.1 Unit packs 

Each complete neural stimulator and/or separate 
component(s) shall be packaged in a unit pack. 

Each unit pack shall be supplied with one copy of the 
relevant accompanying documentation specified in 
clause 6. In order to gain access to the accompanying 
documentation, it shall not be necessary to penetrate 
the package layer that maintains the sterility of de- 
vices supplied in the sterile condition. 

4.2 Multiple packs 

One or more unit packs may be packaged in a multiple 
pack. 



The multiple pack should protect the contents during 
normal handling, transit and storage. 

5 Package marking 

5.1 General 

The markings should be readily readable, should re- 
main legible after normal handling, transit and storage, 
and should not adversely affect the contents. 

5.2 Unit packs 

The unit pack shall bear at least the following infor- 
mation: 

a) description of the contents and quantity, including 
the model designation(s); 

b) name and address of the manufacturer and/or 
supplier; 

c) serial number(s) (preceded by either "serial num- 
ber" or "SN") and/or lot number(s) as appropriate 
of the contents; 

d) date of manufacture or expiration date 
(month/year), preceded by, for example, "use 
by , exp , 

e) if appropriate, the word "STERILE" or if nonster- 
ile, a warning statement to that effect; 

f) designation on the actual sterile pack that it is the 
sterile pack; 

g) the method of sterilization, if appropriate; 

h) if appropriate, the words "for single use" or 
equivalent; 

i) written or pictorial instructions for opening the 
unit pack; 

j) the acceptable conditions of storage and trans- 
port. 

5.3 Multiple packs 

The multiple pack shall bear at least the following in- 
formation: 

a) the name and address of the manufacturer and/or 
supplier; 

b) the number of unit packs and a description (in- 
cluding model designation) of the contents; 



IS 14921:2001 
ISO 10310:1995 



c) tjhe acceptable conditions of storage/transport. 
6 Accompanying documentation 

6.1 General 

Each separate piece of accompanying documentation 
shall include 

a) the name and address of the manufacturer and/ 
or supplier; 

b) the year of issue of the document. 

6.2 Implantable components 

Each unit pack containing an implantable component 
shall be supplied with the appropriate accompanying 
documentation specified in 6.2.1 and/or 6.2.2. 

6.2.1 Implant pulse generators and implant RF 
receivers 

a) Registration document at least in duplicate bear- 
ing the following: 

1) instruction that one copy of the document be 
returned to the manufacturer or supplier after 
implantation of the device and the other copy 
retained in the patient's record; 

2) space for the following: 

— model designation of the device and de- 
vice name or description, 

— serial number or lot number of the device, 

— identity of the patient, 

— date of implantation, 

— name and address of the centre at which 
the device was implanted. 

b) One copy of an identification card bearing at least 
the following: 

1) instruction that the card be retained by the 
patient; 

2) space for the following: 

— model designation and name of the de- 
vice, 



— identity of the patient, 

— date of implantation, 

— name and address of the centre at which 
the device was implanted, 

— a warning regarding MRI examinations, 

— recommended procedures regarding se- 
curity gates and systems. 

c) If appropriate, details of the generic composition 
of any pharmacologically active coating material 
(e.g. antibiotic) and/or teachable material. 

d) Information specific to the type of component 
contained in the unit pack, giving the range of 
values for; parameters and the value as shipped, 
where appropriate. 

1) implant pulse generators: 

— model designation, 

— model designation(s) of appropriate 
programmers), if any. 

— pulse amplitude, expressed in volts, 

— puise frequency, expressed in hertz or 
pulses per reciprocal second, 

— pulse waveform, expressed as mono- 
phasic or biphasic, 

— pulse duration, expressed in milliseconds 
or microseconds, 

— cycle-on and cycle-off times for devices 
that are intended to stimulate cyclically, 

— ramp-up and ramp-down times, 

— expected device longevity at continuous 
use at a specified or nominal output, 

— if applicable, instructions for recharging or 
renewing the power source, 

— means of external adjustment of the im- 
plant pulse generator, if any, or a state- 
ment that no means of external 
adjustment are provided, 

— if supplied nonsterile, a recommended 
method of sterilizing the implant pulse 



serial number or lot number of the device, 



IS 14021:2001 
ISO 10310 : 1995 



generator, and the maximum permitted 
number of sterilizing cycles; 

2) implant RF receivers: 



— mode! designation, 

— carrier frequency, 
or megahertz, 



expressed in kilohertz 



pulse waveform and its amplitude, ex- 
pressed in volts, as shipped and adjustable 
range and at maximum adjustable output, 
where appropriate; 

model designation(s) of the appropriate 
transmitter(s), 

the model designation(s) of the appropriate 
antenna(s), 

if supplied nonsterile, a recommended 
method of sterilizing the implant RF re- 
ceiver, and the maximum permitted num-. 
ber of sterilizing cycles. 



6.2.2 Other implantable components 



a) 



If applicable, details of the generic composition 
of any pharmacologically active coating material 
(e.g. antibiotic) and/or leachable material. 

b) Information specific to the type of component 
contained in the unit pack, giving the range of 
values for parameters and the values as shipped, 
where appropriate: 

1) implant lead(s): 

— model designation, 

— device(s) with which the implant lead is 
compatible, 

— overall length expressed in centimetres, 
and outside diameter (where appropriate) 
expressed in millimetres, 

— if supplied nonsterile, a recommended 
method of sterilizing the implant lead and 
the maximum permitted number of steril- 
izing cycles; 



2) connectors and adapters: 
— model designation, 



— device intended to connect or to enable 
connection, 

— overall length expressed in centimetres, 
and outside diameter (where appropriate) 
expressed in millimetres, 

— if supplied nonsterile, a recommended 
method of sterilizing the connector or 
adapter, and the maximum permitted 
number of sterilizing cycles; 

3) electrodes: 

— construction material(s), 

— diagram of the electrode(s), dimensioned 
in millimetres, 

— for electrodes that are detachable from the 
implant lead, connector system(s) or the 
model designation(s) of the implant lead(s) 
to which they are intended to be con- 
nected, 

— if supplied nonsterile, a recommended 
method of sterilizing the electrode, and the 
maximum permitted number of sterilizing 
cycles. 



6.3 Non implantable components 

Each unit pack containing a non-implantable compo- 
nent shall bear, or contain in a technical information 
sheet, at least the following information specific to 
the component, giving the range of values for, and the 
method of adjustment of each parameter, where ap- 
plicable. 



6.3.1 Programmers 

a) model designation; 

b) mode of operation (i.e., magnetic, RF, etc.); 

c) the model designation(s) of the appropriate im- 
plant pulse generator(s); 

d) if applicable, instructions for recharging or renew- 
ing the power source; 

e) the function and range of any controls. 

6.3.2 Transmitters 

a) model designation; 



IS 14921 :2001 
ISO 10310:1995 



b) model designation(s) of the appropriate antenna(s) 
and whether integral or separate; 

c) model designation(s) of the appropriate implant 
RF receiver(s); 

d) the function and range of all controls; 

e) expected battery longevity at continuous use at a 
typical or nominal output; 

f) type of battery required (where applicable). 

6.3.3 Antennas 

a) model designation; 

b) model designation(s) of the appropriate 
fansmitterfs); 

c) model designation(s) of the appropriate cable(s); 

d) model designation(s) of the appropriate implant 
RF receiver(s); 

e) recommended method for applying and removing 
the antenna from the skin where applicable. 

6.3.4 Cables 

a) model designation; 

b) model designations of the devices with which the 
cable is intended to be connected; 

c) overall length expressed in centimetres. 

6.4 Information for patient 

Each unit pack containing a device having controls 
whereby adjustments can be made by the patient 
shall be supplied with documentation that provides 
information on the adjustments. 



This document should be separate from, and ad- 
ditional to, all other documentation required by this 
International Standard. 



6.5 Information for clinician 

Each unit pack shall contain information on, and in- 
structions for use of the neural stimulator or compo- 
nent, and which gives at least the following 
information: 

a) indications and contraindications for the use of the 
neural stimulator or component; 

b) recommended method for pre-implantation test- 
ing and general guidelines for implantation pro- 
cedures; 

c) recommended method for post-implantation test- 
ing of the system; 

d) recommended method for using the programmer 
to set or adjust the implant pulse generator; 

e) recommended method for adjusting the implant 
RF receiver and/or transmitter, stating which ad- 
justments may be made by the patient and which 
should be made by the clinician; 

f) block diagram of the electrical circuit of the neural 
stimulator; 

g) diagram showing the shape(s) of the current 
pulses delivered by the neural stimulator when 
using the recommended electrode configuration; 

h) flow diagram or recommended method for fault 
diagnosis; 

i) description of the means of non-invasive identifi- 
cation. 



IS 14921 : 2001 
ISO 10310:1995 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Ratidnale 



A.1 General 

This International Standard is concerned with the 
safety-in-use of implantable neural stimulators. The 
appropriate marking and labelling of these devices 
provide useful and important information to the phys- 
ician, surgeon and patient. Clinically irrelevant infor- 
mation and requirements are not included in this 
Standard. The prime rationale for the requirements of 
this International Standard is the clinical significance 
of the information to the user. This Standard is written 
in a broad manner which includes current state-of- 
the-art technology and knowledge. However, it should 
not limit future innovation while still maintaining ad- 
equate physician and patient safety and knowledge. 

A.2 Rationale for specific clauses 

The following are rationale for specific clauses in this 
International Standard, with clause numbers parallel 
to those in the body of the document. 



Clause 1 Scope 

Implantable neural stimulators include all neural tissue 
as listed, including the central and peripheral nervous 
tissue. 



Subclause 4.1 

A unit pack may contain more than one component 
(e.g. tunnelling tool and accessories) as a "kit". The 
definition of unit pack allows a single unit or kit. A kit 
may contain multiple components. 



Subclause 6.2.2 b) 2) 

The outside diameter of connectors and adapters may 
be irregular. Thus, the outside diameter measurement 
is only important when applicable. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of £ BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. MHD 7 ( 2734 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



f337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



G 



T60 38 43 
L60 20 25 
T235 02 16, 235 04 42 
1235 15 19,235 23 15 

T832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



