**************** 


-k  is^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 

"^^  ^  ^  ^  %  ?R^" 

Jawaharlal  Nehru 

Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New 


^^iiT'jsiS'SfS^^is*?*:: 


•^■•■^^^■r 


li^  i/ir  w  w  w  w  w  WW  ^  ^  ^  tIt  w  w  w 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<ii^ 


UI> 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


^  IS  13582  T  :  1992 

Tentative  Indian  Standard 
AGARBATTIS  —  SPECIFICATION 


UDC  665-582-84 


O  BIS  1992 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN.  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

December  1992  Price  Group  2 


Natural  and  Synthetic  Perfumery  Materials  Sectional  Comr^ttee,  PCD  18 


FOREWORD 

Incense  burning  is  a  tradition  at  festive  occasions,  weddings  and  religious  functions.  The 
manufacture  of  agarbattis  involves  no  typical  or  sophisticated  chemicals  and  the  raw  materials  consist 
of  powdered  odoriferous  or  otherwise  roots  barks,  seeds,  woods,  leaves,  flowers,  etc,  and  resins, 
essential  oils  and  aromatic  chemicals.  The  paste  made  with  the  raw  materials  and  water,  gum  and 
colour  whenever  required  is  applied  to  bamboo  sticks  on  which  additional  perfumes  may  be  added 
later.    The  process  of  manufacture  is  entirely  manual. 

The  industry  although  well  established  needs  scientific  orientation.  Skill  and  secret  of  performance 
still  lies  with  individuals  and  there  are  innumerable  varieties  of  agarbattis  carrying  innumerable 
fragrance  patterns.  It  is  hoped  with  the  formulation  of  this  standard  quality  products  would  be 
made  available  to  the  Indian  and  overseas  consumers.  AGARBATTIS  being  one  of  the  items 
exported  to  overseas  markets,  it  is  hoped  that  this  standard  will  ensure  the  export  of  quality  goods. 

As  the  manufacture  of  .^G.^i?fi.4rr/S' is  mainly  done  by  the  cottage  industry  and  the  process  of 
manufacture  is  entirely  manual,  there  was  a  stiff  resistance  from  AGARBATTIS  manufacturers' 
associations  to  the  formulation  of  any  standard  for  AGARBATTIS.  According  to  them  it  would  kill 
the  industry  and  create  unnecessary  hardships. 

Keeping  in  view  the  significance  of  this  product  which  is  produced  largely  in  rural  sector  and  has  a 
sizeable  export  market,  the  Committee  formulated  a  standard  covering  only  physical  characteristics 
like  fragrance,  visual  inspection,  length,  size,  burning  time,  etc,  initially  with  a  view  to  improve  it 
substantially  after  developing  performance  tests  in  due  course  to  distinguish  an  acceptable  product 
from  non-acceptable  one. 

A  suggestion  was  received  to  stipulate  strictly  the  ingredients  and  raw  materials  that  should  be  used 
along  with  the  methods  of  test,  for  qualitative  and  quantitative  determination  of  each  of  these 
ingredients  in  finished  agarbattis  mix.  This  was  not  found  feasible  practically  to  devise  methods  of 
test  for  detection  of  individual  raw  materials  including  the  perfumery  compound  chemically  with 
any  reliability.  The  other  alternative  found  was  to  prescribe  a  list  of  positive  ingredients  which 
should  be  used  and  a  list  of  negative  ingredients  which  are  definitely  known  to  be  harmful  and 
should  not  be  used.  It  was  observed  that  a  warranty  may  be  given  by  the  manufacturer  that  raw 
materials  listed  in  the  negative  list  have  not  been  used.  In  this  manner  the  manufacturer  would 
not  be  required  to  divulge  his  secret  formula  and  at  the  same  time  he  would  be  free  to  blend  the 
raw  materials  of  his  choice  including  perfumery  compounds.  It  was  agreed  that  this  list  would  be 
generated  in  due  course  after  generating  data  on  the  subject. 

The  standard  for  agarbattis  was  finalized  in  1984  but  could  not  be  sent  to  press  in  the  light  of 
strong  representation  made  by  the  industry  to  formulation  of  any  standard  for  agarbattis.  However 
Export  Inspection  Council  gazetted  a  notification  for  agarbattis  covering  minimum  requirements 
for  quality  way  back  in  1984. 

Lately  some  of  the  manufacturers  have  expressed  their  desire  to  develop  a  national  standard  for 
agarbattis  and  the  Committee  had  agreed  to  print  this  standard  as  a  tentative  standard  which  would 
not  be  amenable  to  certification  under  BIS  Act.  The  decision  of  printing  this  standard  as  tentative 
has  been  taken  in  view  of  the  observation  that  specific  well  defined  performance  tests  to  distinguish 
a  good  from  a  bad  agarbattis  and  ensuring  in  the  process  the  free  play  of  the  ingenuity  of  the 
manufacturer  to  vary  his  formula  including  fragrance  under  a  code  of  discipline  which  ensures  that 
no  harmful  ingredients  have  been  used,  needs  to  be  developed. 

(  Continued  on  third  cover ) 


IS  13582  T  :  1992 


Tentative  Indian  Standard 
AGARBATTIS  —  SPECIFICATION 


1  SCOPE 

This  tentative  standard  prescribes  the  requirements 
and  methods  of  sampling  and  test  for 
AGARBATTIS,  also  known  as  incense  sticks. 
This  standard  does  not  cover  other  incense  items 
like  cone,  logs,  etc. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  Indian  Standards  arc  necessary 
adjuncts  to  this  standard: 

IS  No.  Title 

ment  of  natural  and  synthetic 
perfumery  material  (  first 
revision  ) 

4905  :  1968  Methods  for  random  sampling 

6597  :  1988  Glossary  of  terms    relating    to 

natural  and  synthetic  perfumery 
materials  (^rsf  revision). 

The  above  mentioned  standards  contain  pro- 
visions which,  through  reference  in  this  text,  con- 
stitute provisions  of  this  standard.  At  the  time 
of  publication,  the  editions  indicated  were  valid. 
All  standards  are  subject  to  revision,  and  parties 
to  agreements  based  on  this  standard  arc  encour- 
aged to  investigate  the  possibility  of  applying  the 
most  recent  editions  of  the  standards  indicated 
above. 


this     standard,     the 
IS  6597  :  1988    shall 


4.3  Fragrance 

The  sticks  shall  give  out  pleasant  aroma  con- 
tinuously while  burning  for  its  full  length  of  the 
coated  portion  when  tested  as  per  procedure  given 
in  Annex  B.  Reference  may  also  be  made  to 
IS  2284  :  1988  for  olfactory  assessment  of 
agarbattis  sticks. 

4.4  Size  of  the  Sticks 

Unless  specified  by  the  purchaser,  the  bare  por- 
tion of  the  sticks  shall  not  be  more  than  20 
percent  of  the  declared  length. 

J  s    Tft 1 /A i:^-. 

•t.^   ouniiiig  «^u8iiiiy 

4.5.1  The  agarbattis  shall  burn  continuously  and 
shall  not  extinguish  even  once  before  burning  of 
the  coated  portion. 

4.5.2jThe  smoke/fumes  produced  as  a  result  of 
burning  the  agarbattis  shall  not  be  irritating  to 
the  nostrils/eyes. 

4.5.3  While  burning  the  AGARBATTIS,  no  sparks 
shall  be  produced  nor  shall  any  part  of  the 
glowing  tip  alongwilh  the  unburnt  coating  shall 
fail  off  so  as  to  constitute  a  fire  hazard  of  any 
kind. 


3  TERMINOLOGY 

3.1  For    the    purpose    of 
definitions   prescribed     in 
apply. 

3.2  Sticks 


Full  length  of  the  AGARBATTIS  inclusive  of 
paste  and  bare  portion. 

4  REQUIREMENTS 

4.1  Visual  Inspection 

The  sticks  shall  be  strong  enough  to  stand  up- 
right and  shall  not  bend  under  their  own  weight. 

NOTE  —  This   however  shall   not   be  applicable     to 
'BALBATTr. 

4.2  Coating 

The  application  of  the  coating  (  paste  )  shall  be 
reasonably  uniform  when  tested  as  per  procedure 
given  in  Annex  A. 


4.6  Burning  Time 

It    shall    be    declared    by 
required  by  the  purchaser. 


the    manufacturer   if 


5  PACKING  AND  MARKING 

5.1  Packing 

The  sticks  shall  be  packed  in  suitable  packages  in 
tubular,  flat  or  rectangular  form  or  as  agreed  to 
between  the  purchaser  and  the  supplier. 

5.2  Marking 

Each  packet  shall  be  marked  with  the  following: 

a)  Indication  of  the  source  of  manufacture; 

b)  Net  mass  in  grams  and/or  number  of  sticks; 

c)  Burning  time,  if  required  by  the  buyer;  and 

d)  Batch  number  in  code  or  otherwise. 

NOTE  —  This  standard  is  used  as  a  tentative  standard 
in  order  to  enable  collection  of  data  on  the  prescribed 
requirements  and  to  gain  experience  on  the  test 
methods,  etc.  Based  on  these,  issuance  of  this  standard 
as  a  firm  standard  will  be  considered.  In  view  of  this, 
certification  of  product  as  per  thisfstandard  would  not 
be  possible  under  BIS  Act.  The  standard  rs,  however, 
recommended  for  wider  implementation  by  the  all 
concerned. 


I 


IS  13582  T:  1992 


6  SAMPLING 

6.1  Scale  of  Sampling 

6.1.1  Lot 

In  a  single  consignment,  all  cartons  of 
AG ARBATTIS  hQlorxiingio  the  same  batch  of 
manufacture  shall  be  grouped  together  and  each 
group  shall  constitute  a  lot. 

6.1.2  For  ascertaining  the  conformity  of  the 
material  to  the  requirements  of  the  specification, 
samples  shall  be  tested  from  each  lot  separately. 

6.1.3  The  number  of  AGARBATTIS  to  be  chosen 
from  the  lot  depends  on  the  size  of  the  lot  and  shall 
be  in  accordance  with  col  1,  2  and  3  of  Table  1. 
From  each  selected  carton  approximately  equal 
number  of  AGARBATTIS  shall  be  taken  from 
each  packet  so  as  to  constitute  the  required 
sample  size  given  in  col  3  of  Table  1. 

6.1.3.1  The  required  number  of  packets  from 
each  selected  carton  and  the  required  number  of 
sticks  from  each  selected  packet  shall  be  chosen 
at  random.  In  order  to  ensure  the  randomness  of 
selection  procedure  given  in  IS  4905  :  1968  may 
be  followed, 

6.2  Number  of  Tests  and  Criteria  for  Conformity 


6.2.1  Visual  and  Dimensional  Characteristics  (.  4A 
and  4.4  ) 

Each  stick  selected  according  to  6.1.3  shall  be 
examined  for  visual  and  dimensional  requirements. 
A  stick  failing  to  satisfy  any  of  these  requirements 
shall  be  considered  as  defective. 

6.2.1.1  The  lot  shall  be  deemed  to  have  satisfied 
these  requirements  if  the  number  of  defective 
sticks  found  in  the  sample  is  less  than  or  equal  to 
the  corresponding  permissible  number  of  defec- 
tives given  in  col  4  of  Table  1.  The  lot,  having 
been  found  satisfactory  for  these  requirements, 
shall  be  further  examined  under  6.2.2. 


6.2.2  Characteristics 
Dimensional 


other      than      Visual     and 


For  fragrance,  coating  and  burning  quality, 
number  of  tests  given  in  col  5  of  Table  1  shall  be 
carried  out.  For  this  purpose,  required  number 
of  AGARBATTIS  shall  be  taken  from  those 
already  examined  according  to  6.2.1  and 
found  satisfactory. 


6.2.2.1  The  lot  shall  be 
these  requirements  if 
under  6.2.2. 


declared   to   have   met 
there     is    no    failure 


6.2.3  The  lot  shall  be  considered  as  conforming 
to  the  requirement  of  the  specification  if  6.2.1 
and  6.2.2  are  satisfied. 


Table  1     Scale  of  Sampling  and  Permissible  Number  of  Defectives 

{Clause  6.1.3) 


No.  of  Cartons* 
in  the  Lot 

No.  of  Cartons* 
to  be  Chosen 

For  Visual  and 
Dimensional 
Requirements 

No.  of  Tests  for  Each  of  the 

Characteristics  Other  Than 

Visual  and  Dimensional 

Is'o, 
to 

of  Sticks 
be  Taken 

Permissible 

No.  of 
Defectives 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

Up  to      100 

2 

20 

2 

! 

101  to     300 

3 

32 

3 

1 

301  to  1000 

5 

50 

5 

1 

1  001  to  3  000 

7 

80 

7 

2 

3  001  to  5  000 

'0 

125 

10 

2 

5  001  and  above 

15 

200 

14 

3 

♦Carton  consists  of  12  packets,  rolls,  etc. 

IS  13582  T  :  1992 


ANNEX  A 
(  Clause  4.2  ) 


METHODS  OF  TEST  FOR  UNIFORMITY  OF  COATING  (PASTE)  AND  BURNING 

QUALITY  OF  AGARBATTIS 


A-i  UNIFORMITY  OF  COATING 
A-1.1  Procedure 

Take   two    sticks   from   the   sample  and  cut  each 


into  three  equal  parts  of  the  coated  portion. 
Scrap  out  the  paste  from  each  portion,  collect  it 
separately  and  weigh.  The  average  mass  of  the 
coating  of  the  three  portions  of  the  same  stick 
shall  not  vary  by  more  than  ±10  percent. 


ANNEX  B 
(  Clause  4.3  ) 

METHOD  FOR  OLFACTORY  ASSESSMENT  OF  FRAGRANCE 
{AROMA  OF  AGARBATTIS) 


BO  GENERAL 

The  method  is  based  on  olfactory  assessment  of  a 
given  material  by  a  panel  of  three  persons. 

B-1  REQUIREMENTS 

B-1.1  General  Requirements 

B-1. 1.1  Selection  and  Training 

Better  results  are  obtained  if  individuals  with  a 
keen  sense  of  smell  are  selected  for  making  the 
olfactory  assessment. 

B-1. 1,2  Fatigue 

Continuous  smelling  causes  olfactory  fatigue, 
decreases  critical  odour  perception.  To  avoid 
this,  the  number  of  samples  assessed  during  a 
session  should  be  limited  as  far  as  is  practical. 
Further,  during  smelling  the  body  shall  be 
relaxed.  Resting  for  an  interval  betvi-een  smelling 
different  samples  is  also  advantageous.  If  the 
number  of  samples  to  be  tested  is  fairly  large,  it 
isadvisable  to  examine  last  those  samples  which 
are  known  to  be  fatiguing. 

B-1. 1.3  Time  Olfactory  Assessment 

The  evidence  relating  to  the  most  favourable 
time  for  conducting  olfactory  assessment  is  some- 
what conflicting.  However,  the  morning  appears 
to  be  generally  favoured. 

B-1. 1.4  Freedom  from  Contaminating  Odour 

It  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  hands,  the  nose 
are  free  from  contaminating  odour  as  these  are 
likely  to  vitiate  the  result.  It  is  recommended 
that  the  individual  responsible  for  assessing  odour 
washer  his/her  hands  several  times  during  a 
smelling  session. 


B-1. 2  Material  Requirements 

B-1. 2.1  Stand 

A  cruciform  patterned  3-clip  stand,  approximately 
21  cm  high,  or  any  other  suitable  device  to  hold 
AGARBATTIS  {see  Fig.  1  ). 

B-1. 2. 2  Environment 

A  well-ventilated  room,  as  free  as  possible  from 
all  outside  disturbances.  Ideally,  the  temperature 
and  humidity  suited  are  about  20"C  and  80  per- 
cent RH,  respectively.  The  colouring  of  the  room 
shall  be  sober  and  the  furnishings  restricted.  The 
general  environment  shall  have  a  restful  rather 
than  a  distracting  efiect. 

B-2  PROCEDURE 

B-2.1  The  three  sticks  from  the  sample  and  cut 
each  into  three  equal  parts  of  the  coated  portion. 
Take  one  part,  burn  and  place  in  the  stand. 
Keep  the  stand  at  such  a  distance  from  the  nose 
that  there  is  incipient  yet  distinct  perception  of 
odour.  While  smelling,  concentrate  wholly  on 
the  sensations  received  and  make  mental  obser- 
vations. The  stick  shall  give  out  pleasant  aroma 
while  burning  for  its  full  length.  Test  each  part 
separately  and  independently  to  assess  the  aroma. 
The  lower  part  of  each  stick  shall  be  tested  first 
then  middle  and  then  upper. 

B-2. 1.1  It  is  important  to  note  that,  although  the 
room  shall  be  well  ventilated,  the  sticks  kept 
under  examination  should  not  be  exposed  to  a 
direct  drought. 

B-2. 1.2  All  the  three  persons  of  the  panel  should 
agree  to  uniformity  and  pleasing  ■  aroma  of 
agarbattis  sample. 


IS  13582  T  :  1992 


THIN  FELT 


Fig.  1     Strip  Stand 


(  Continued  from  second  cover  )  -^i 

Initially  a  period  of  two  years  from  the  month  of  its  publication  has  been  assigned  to  this  standard 
as  its  validity  period,  after  expiry  of  which  the  Sectional  Committee  would  review  its  issuance 
as  a  firm  standard. 

Although  no  stipulation  have  been  in  the  standard  regarding  the  composition  of  AGARBATTIS,  it 
is  necessary  that  the  raw  materials  used  are  such  that  in  the  concentrations  in  which  they  are  likely 
to  be  present  in  AGARBATTIS  after  interaction  with  other  raw  materials  used  either  through  storage 
or  during  burning,  are  free  from  and  harmful  effects.  It  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  manufacturers 
of  agarbattis  to  satisfy  themselves  regarding  the  safety  of  their  product  from  this  stand  point  before 
releasing  the  product  for  sale. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the 
final  value,  observed  or  calculated  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off"  in 
accordance  with  IS  2  :  I960 'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  {  revised  y.  The  number  of 
significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value 
in  this  standard. 


Standard  Mark 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  Ihe  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on 
products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced 
to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the 
producer.  Standard  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity 
to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the 
use  of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained 
from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 


'^ 


BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyrlghi 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in 
any  form  witliout  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the 
course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.      Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (  Publications  ).  BIS. 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any,  are 
issued  from  time  to  time.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of 
the  latest  amendments  or  edition.  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent  to  BIS  giving  the 
following  reference  • 

Doc  :  No  PCD  18  (230) 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OP  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters. 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg.  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones:  331  01  31.  331  13  75 


Regional  Offices: 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI   110002 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  1.  T.  Scheme  VII  M.  V.  I.  P.  Road.  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446.  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036 


Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road.  MADRAS  600113 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC.  Marol.  Andheri  (  East ) 
BOMBAY  400093 


Telegrams  ;  Manaksanstha 
(  Common  to  all  Offices  ) 


Telephone 

f33l  01  31 
[331  13  75 

84  99,  37  85  61, 
86  26,  37  86  62 


f37 
[37 


f53  38  43,  53  16  40. 
[53  23  84 

(235  02  16,  235  04  42, 
1235  15  19.  235  23  15 

/632  92  95,  632  78  58, 
1632  78  91,  632  78  92 


Branches  :  AH  MAD  AB  AD,  BANGALORE,  BHOPAL,  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD,  GHAZIABAD,  GUWAHATI,  HYDERABAD,  JAIPUR,  KANPUR, 
LUCKNOW,  PATNA,  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Printradc,  New  Delhi,  India 


