**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10600 (1983) : Recommendations for modular co-ordination 
- principles and rules [CED 51: Planning, Housing and 
pre-f abricated construction] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 72V013 



IS : 10600^1913 
ISO 2848-1974 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 




RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 

MODULAR GO-ORDINATION - 

PRINCIPLES AND RULES 

(ISO Title : Modular Co-ordination — Principles and Rules) 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical. with ISO 2848-1974 'Modular co-ordination — 
Principles and rules* issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ), was 
adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Modular Co-ordination 
Sectional Committee and approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard*. 



Cross References 

International Standard 

ISO 1006-1973 Modular co-ordination — Basic IS 
module 

ISO 1040-1973 Modular co-ordination — Multi- 
modules for horizontal co-ordinating 
dimensions 

ISO 1791-1973 Modular co-ordination — IS 
Vocabulary 



Corresponding Indian Standard 

10316-1983 Recommendations for modular 
co-ordination — Basic module (Identical) 

IS : 7921-1975 Recommendations for modular 
co-ordination multimodules and preferred 
sizes for horizontal co-ordinating and con- 
trolling dimensions (Partially corresponds) 

: 4993-1983 Glossary of terms relating 
to modular co-ordination (second revision) 
(Technically equivalent) 



ISO 1803-1973 Tolerances for building 
Vocabulary 



IS : 4993-1983 Glossary of terms relating to 
modular co-ordination (second revision) 
(Partially corresponds) 



ISO 1790-1970 Modular co-ordination - Refe- IS 
rence lines of horizontal controlling co- 
ordinating dimensions 



: 7921-1975 Recommendations for modular 
co-ordination multi-module and preferred 
sizes for horizontal co-ordinating and con- 
trolling dimensions (Partially corresponds) 



Adopted 31 May 1983 



© July 1984, ISI 



Gr3 



IH D I AN. V .JS.T A-N DARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELH1 110002 



IS : 10600-1983 
ISO 2848-1974 



1 SCOPE 

This International Standard specifies the aims of modular 
co-ordination and states the general principles and rules to 
be applied in determining the sizes of building components 

and equipment, and of assemblies and buildings themselves. 



2 FIELD OF APPLICATION 

Modular co-ordination applies to the design and 
construction of buildings of ail types and to the production 
of building components of all kinds used for their 
construction. 



3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this International Standard, the 
definitions given in ISO 1791 apply. 



4 AIMS OF MODULAR CO-ORDINATION 

The principal object of modular co-ordination is to assist 
rationalization and industrialization within the bui[ding 
industry and associated industries, by standardization in 
such a way that components may be manufactured on an 
industrial scale, and/or erected efficiently on site, thereby 
improving the economics of building. 

in addition, modular co-ordination is intended : 

1 ) to facilitate co-operation between building designers, 
manufacturers, distributors and contractors; 

2) to permit the use of building components of 
standard sizes to construct different types of building; 

-3) in design work, to simplify the preparation of 
building drawings and make possible the determination 
of the sizes and position of each building component in 
relation to other components and to the building as a 
whole; 

4) to optimize the number of standard sizes of building 
components; 



5) to permit the interchangeability of these 
components, whatever their material, form or method of 
manufacture; 

6) to simplify site operations by rationalizing setting 
out, positioning and assembly of building components; 

7) to ensure dimensional co-ordination between 
installations {equipments, storage units, other fitted 
furniture, etc.) and the rest of the building. 



5 BASIS OF MODULAR CO-ORDINATION 

Modular co-ordination is essentially based on : 

1) the use of modules: the basic module and 
multimodules; 

2) the use of a reference system to define co-ordinating 
spaces and zones for building elements and for the 
components which form them; 

3) rules for location building elements witnin the 
reference system; 

4) rules for sizing building components in order to 
determine their work sizes; 

5) rules for defining preferred sizes for building 
components and controlling dimensions for buildings. 



6 MODULES 

6.1 Basic module 

The basic module is the fundamental unit of size in 
modular co-ordination 1 >. 

The co-ordinating sizes of building components, of the 
parts of buildings they form and of buildings themselves 
shall be multiples of the basic module. 

6.2 Multimodules 

Multimodules are selected multiples of the basic module; 
different multimodules will suit particular applications. 
However, since their values must not be chosen arbitrarily 



1) See ISO 1006. The symbol of the basic module is M and its value 1 M - 100 mm. 



IS : 10600-1983 
ISO 2848-1974 



if dimensional co-ordination is to be achieved, International 
Standards for their sizes are necessary 1 K 

Using multimodules, it is possible to achieve a substantial 
reduction in the number of co-ordinating sizes. 

A further reduction in *he number of co-ordinating sizes 
may be achieved by means of general series of 
multimodular sizes based on selected multimodules. Such a 
reduction is particularly recommended for components 
having at least one dimension equal to one of the 
dimensions of the functional element of which they are a 
part. 



7 CO-ORDINATION OF NON-MODULAR SI2ES2) 

The full use of modular co-ordination will not always be 
possible or economical, so that the use of non-modular sizes 
must be envisaged. 

In particular, the thicknesses of many building components 
and assemblies may be non-modular. Such thicknesses are 
determined by economic and functional considerations. In 
some cases, such sizes could be co-ordinated by the use of 
simple fractions to the basic module {submodules) 3) . 

The determination of size for multimodules and planning 
modules shall not be based on submoduies. 



8 REFERENCE SYSTEM 

The t eference system is a system of points, lines and planes 
to which the sizes and positions of building components or 
assemblies relate. 

A reference system should be used during the design stage, 
and may also form the basis of the system of lines from 
which measurements on site are set out. 

8.1 Modular space-grid 

A modular space-grid is a three-dimensional system of 
planes within which a building and its components are 
located. The distance between the planes in such a system is 
equal to the basic module, or to a multimodule. (An 
example is shown in figure 1.) 

NOTE — This multimodule may differ for each of tne three 
directions of the modular space-grid. 

8.2 Modular grids 

Designs have to be expressed in two dimensions. To this 
end, horizontal and vertical projections of the modular 
space grid are used, which are known as modular grids. 

Different modular grids may be superimposed on the same 
plan or elevation for different purposes. 



The advantage of using grids is that they provide a 
continuous reference system in a project. The position of 
components and their co-ordinating dimensions can thus be 
recognized both by those preparing drawings and by those 
reading them. 

8.2. 1 Basic module grid 

The fundamental modular grid is that in which the spacing 
of consecutive parallel lines is equal to the basic module. 
(See ISO 1006.) 

8.2.2 Multimodular grids 

In addition to the basic module grid, multimodular grids in 
which the spacing of the lines is a multimoduljB may be 
used. This multimodule may differ for each of the two 
directions of the grid. 

Lines in a multimodular grid normally coincide with lines in 
the basic module grid. 

In practice, however, it may be advantageous to displace 
modular grids used for different purposes in relation to 
each other. 

8.2.3 Interruptions ana displacements of modular grids 

It may be necessary to interrupt a modular grid (for 
example, in order to accommodate dividing elements). The 
width of the zone of interruption of the modular grid may 
be modular or non-modular (neutral zone). 

When several modular grids are used in designing the same 
plan, it may be advantageous to displace the grids with 
reference to each other in one or both directions. The 
displacement between the grids shall be chosen so as to 
produce a solution appropriate to the project as a whole. 
(An example is shown in figure 2.) 

8.3 Controlling reference system 

The reference system described above can be further 
elaborated. The planes in the modular space grid form a 
fundamental system of reference for the elements of 
construction, and therefore are termed "controlling 
planes". The zones for floors, walls, etc. lying between 
controlling planes are referred to as "controlling zones". On 
plans, sections and elevations, controlling planes are 
indicated by "controlling lines". The dimensions between 
controlling planes are known as "controlling dimensions". 

Controlling planes divide the volume of a building into 
controlling zones and the usable spaces between them. 
Controlling zones are occupied (but not always entirely 
filled) by components. Usable spaces are bounded 
horizontally by floor and ceiling planes, and vertically by 
load-bearing wall and column zones. 



1) See ISO 1040. In this International Standard, the use of brackets signifies a size of limited applicability which will only appear in specific 
national standards. 

2) See ISO 1791, terms 2.1 .12 and 2.1.15. 

3) The values of these have yet to be determined. 



IS : 10600-1983 
ISO 2848-1974 



Controlling planes also indicate where joints between 
elements of construction are most likely to occur. The 
dimensions of these elements, therefore, are directly related 
to controlling dimensions. 



9 LOCATION AND DIMENSIONING 

For the purposes of design, each building component and 
assembly is assumed to be located in a space within the 
reference system defined by reference planes or lines — its 
"co-ordinating space". This space includes the space 
required for joints and tolerances (deviations). 

In modular planning, different methods of locating 
components may be used. The modular plane or line 
defining the location of a component may be boundary (see 
figure 3) or axial (see figure 4). Sometimes a component 



may be located asymmetrically in relation to a modular 
plane or line. 

In practice, work -sizes 1 * of components and assemblies are 
derived from co-ordinating sizes. Allowances must be made 
in particular for manufacturing, site setting-out and 
erection deviations. 1 ) 



10 PREFERRED SIZES 

In order to permit further reduction in the ranges of sizes 
resulting from the application of modular sizes to building 
components and assemblies and to controlling dimensions, 
general series of preferred multimodular sizes can be used. 

Preferred sizes for various components and assemblies and 
for various controlling dimensions will be specified in 
future International Standards. 




FIGURE 1 — Example of a modular space-grid 



1) For definitions, see ISO 1803, Tolerances for building - Vocabulary. 



IS : 10600-1983 
ISO 2848-1974 



00990 o o 




|< ^ 2/ixM^ > < 2nxM X~2oM > < ^ 2nxM ^ >j 



FIGURE 2 -Example of modular grid ditplacanMnt 

9? ?? ?? ?? 

dro ctd chu or: 



< nxM > 



< ^ nxM ^> 



< "* M > 



FIGURE 3 - Example of modulation between boundary planes (See also ISO/R 1790) 



9 



9 



? 



? 



A 



--O 



1 



^ 



-?-—?' 



¥- 



_Az 



-o 



FIGURE 4 - Example of mtsraxsal modulation 



Printed at Sfmco Printing Press, Delhi, India 



