**************** 






w^z 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 14501-2 (1998) : Pulse techniques and apparatus, Part 2: 
Pulse measurement and analysis, general considerations 
[LITD 8: Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and 
Accessories] 



S^i ii fc^K^y / 1 /ua5a>N^s=a is^m¥segs 



2^U l»>%55^^>^!^ 



^^cvvv^w 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
'Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



VZS\: 



, 10- 



nvs 1 ^"?^- 



;i#* 



«* 



T ^ 



^ 



.^ 






Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



gi^p^g 



**************** 



BLANK PAGE 




**n±rr 




u*> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14501 ( Part 2 ): 1998 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

FTC d*«R4> #T viM*<W 

Indian Standard 
PULSE TECHNIQUES AND APPARATUS 

PART 2 PULSE MEASUREMENT AND ANALYSIS, GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 



ICS 33.120.10 



©BIS 1998 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1998 Price Group 5 



Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee, LTD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

The objective of this standard is to standardize the definition of terms and the description of techniques and 
procedures which are applicable to the determination of the characteristics of practical and hypothetical pulses 
regardless of the applicable limits of error and to a wide range of technologies and disciplines. 

This standard covers pulse measurement and analysis, general considerations. The Part 1 covers pulse terms and 
definitions. 

This standard is largely based upon IEC Pub 469-2 (1987) 'Pulse techniques and apparatus: Part 2 Pulse 
measurement and analysis, general considerations', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14501 ( Part 2 ) : 1998 



Indian Standard 
PULSE TECHNIQUES AND APPARATUS 

PART 2 PULSE MEASUREMENT AND ANALYSIS, GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard provides definitions and descriptions of 
the techniques and procedures for time domain pulse 
measurements. The definitions and descriptions 
provided are independent of specific devices, 
apparatus, instruments or computing devices which 
may be used in pulse measurements and are necessary 
for: 

— efficient communication of the results of pulse 
measurement, 

— standards for pulse apparatus, and 

— standards for apparatus which employ pulse 
techniques. 

2 REFERENCE 

The Indian Standard given below is a necessary 
adjunct to this standard: 



IS No. 

IS 14501 
(Parti): 



1998 



Title 

Pulse techniques and apparatus: 
Part 1 Pulse terms and definitions 



3 DEFINITIONS 



For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 14501 (Part 1) shall apply, in addition to the 
following. 



3.1 Pulse Measurement Terms 

The pulse measurement terms defined in this clause 
are applicable to measurement in general and are not 
defined in order to draw a distinction between pulse 
measurement and measurement in general. 

3.1.1 Pulse Measurement 

The assignment of a number and a unit of measurement 
to a characteristic, property or attribute of a pulse 
wherein the number and unit assigned indicate the 
magnitude of the characteristic which is associated 
with the pulse. Typically, this assignment is 
accomplished by comparison of a transform of the 
pulse (its pulse waveform) with a scale or reference 
which is calibrated in the unit of measurement. 

3.1.2 Method of Pulse Measurement 

A method of making a pulse measurement comprises: 

— the complete specification of the functional 
characteristics of the devices, apparatus, 



instruments and auxiliary equipment to be 
used; 

— the essential adjustments required; 

— the procedures to be used in making essential 
adjustments; 

— the operations to be performed and, their 
sequence; 

— the corrections that will ordinarily need to be 
made; 

— the procedures for making such corrections; 
and 

— the conditions under which all operations are 
to be carried out. 

3.1.3 Pulse Measurement Process 

A realization of a method of pulse measurement in 
terms of specific devices, apparatus, instruments, 
auxiliary equipment, conditions, operators and 
observers. 

3.1.4 State of Statistical Control 

In a pulse measurement process, that state wherein a 
degree of consistency among repeated measurements 
of a characteristic, property or attribute is attained. 

3.1.5 Error 

The difference between the result of the application of 
a pulse measurement process and the true value of the 
characteristic, property or attribute being measured. 

3.1.6 Dispersion 

The degree of mutual disagreement among the results 
of independent measurements of apulse characteristic, 
property or attribute yielded by repeated applications 
of a pulse measurement process. 

3.1.7 Resolution 

The smallest change in the pulse characteristic, 
property or attribute being measured which can 
unambiguously be discerned or detected in a pulse 
measurement process. 

3.2 Statistical Terms 

Statistical terms are given in IS 7920 (Part 1) 
'Statistical vocabulary and symbols: Part 1 Probability 
and general statistical terms 1 . 

3.3 Waveform Formats 

Waveforms may exist, be recorded or stored in a 
variety of formats. Throughout this standard, it is 
assumed that: 



1 



IS 14501 ( Part 2 ) : 1998 



— waveform formats are in terms of Cartesian 
co-ordinates or some transform thereof, 

— conversion from one waveform format to any 
other is possible, and 

— such waveform format conversions can be 
made with limits of error, dispersion and 
resolution which are consistent with the limits 
of error desired in the pulse measurement 
process. 

3.3.1 Pictorial Format 

A graph, plot or display in which a waveform is 
presented for observation and/or analysis. Any of the 
waveform formats defined in the following clauses 
may be presented in the pictorial format. 

3.3.2 Equational Format 

One or more algebraic equations which specify a 
waveform wherein, typically, a first equation specifies 
the waveform from to to t\ , a second equation specifies 
the waveform from t\ to f2, etc. The equational format 
is typically used to specify hypothetical, ideal or 
reference waveforms. 

3.3.3 Sampled Format 

A waveform which is a series of sample magnitudes 
taken sequentially or non-sequentially as a function of 
time. It is assumed that non-sequential samples may be 
rearranged in time sequence to yield the following 
sampled formats. 

3.3.3.1 Periodically sampled real time format 

A finite sequence of magnitudes mo, mi, mi, m n 

each of which represents the magnitude of the wave at 

times fo, to+At, to+2Ar, , ta+nAt, respectively, 

wherein the data may exist in a pictorial format or as 
a list of numbers. 

3.3.3.2 Periodically sampled equivalent time format 

A format which is identical to the periodically sampled 
real time format, except that the time coordinate is 
equivalent to and convertible to real time. Typically, 
each datum point is derived from a different 
measurement on a different wave in a sequence of 
waves. 

3.3.3.3 Aperiodically sampled real time format 

A format which is identical to the periodically sampled 
real time format, except that the sampling in real time 
is not periodic and wherein the data exist as 
co-ordinate point pairs, fi, mi; ti,rm\ ; t n m n . 

3.3.3.4 Aperiodically sampled equivalent time format 

A format which is identical to the aperiodically 
sampled real time format, except that the time 
coordinate is equivalent to and convertible to real time. 
Typically, each datum point is derived from a different 



measurement on a different wave in a sequence of 
waves. 

3.4 Waveform Epoch Expansion and Contraction 

3.4.1 Waveform Epoch Expansion 

A technique for the determination of the characteristics 
of a transition waveform (or pulse waveform) wherein 
the transition waveform epoch (or pulse waveform 
epoch) is expanded in time to a pulse waveform epoch 
(or waveform epoch) for the determination of 
magnitude and/or time reference lines. The reference 
lines determined by analysis of the pulse waveform (or 
waveform) are transferred to the transition waveform 
(or pulse waveform) for the determination of 
characteristics (see Fig. 1). 

In any waveform epoch expansion procedure, two or 
more sets of reference lines may exist, and the set of 
reference lines being used in any pulse measurement 
process shall be specified. 

3.4.2 Waveform Epoch Contraction 

A technique for the determination of the characteristics 
of individual pulse waveforms (or pulse waveform 
features) wherein the waveform epoch (or pulse 
waveform epoch) is contracted in time to a pulse 
waveform epoch (or transition waveform epoch) for 
the determination of time and/or magnitude 
characteristics (see Fig.l). 

In any waveform epoch contraction procedure, two or 
more sets of time and/or magnitude reference lines 
may exist and the set of reference lines being used in 
any pulse measurement process shall be specified. 

3.5 Reference Pulse Waveforms 

A reference pulse waveform [see 2.4.1.3 and 2.8.1 of 
IS 14501 (Part 1)] may be specified by any of the 
waveform formats defined in 3.3. The characteristics 
of the devices, apparatus, techniques, or algorithms 
used in producing or deriving a reference pulse 
waveform shall be specified. 

3.5.1 Defined Reference Pulse Waveform 

A reference pulse waveform which is defined without 
reference to any practical or derived pulse waveform. 
Typically, a defined reference pulse waveform is an 
ideal pulse waveform. 

3.5.2 Derived Reference Pulse Waveform 

A reference pulse waveform which is derived by a 
specified procedure or algorithm from the pulse 
waveform which is being analyzed in a pulse 
measurement process (see Fig. 2 for an example of a 
derived reference pulse waveform and its algorithm). 

3.5.3 Practiced Reference Pulse Waveform 

A reference pulse waveform which is derived from a 
pulse which is produced by a device or apparatus. 



IS 14501 (Part2): 1998 



PORTION OF PULSE WAVEFORM EPOCH 
INCLUDED IN TRANSITION WAVEFORM EPOCH 




PORTION OF WAVEFORM EPOCH 
INCLUDED IN PULSE WAVEFORM 
EPOCH (PULSE TRAIN EPOCH) 

-~- H^ I 



%'tftf 


t; t( 



TRANSITION WAVEFORM 
"EPOCH 



PULSE WAVEFORM 
EPOCH 



WAVEFORM EPOCH EXPANSION 
WAVEFORM EPOCH CONTRACTION 



WAVEFORM EPOCH 

^- 



Fig. l Waveform Epoch Expansion and Contraction 



PULSE WAVEFORM 




DERIVED REFERENCE 
PULSE WAVEFORM 



PROXIMAL POINT 





— "— - /I 


1 


,,/ 1 


1 


/ 1 


to 


t, 




NOTES 




t-ft = 




h-h = 




tz-ts = 




b-U = 



d h 



Segment of the base line. 

Straight line through first transition proximal and distal points. 

Segment of the top line. 

Exponential curve through last transition proximal, mesial and distal points. 

Fig. 2 Derived Reference Pulse Waveform 



4 MEASUREMENT OF PULSE 
CHARACTERISTICS 

4.1 The Distinction Between Waves and 
Waveforms 

The distinction between waves, pulses and transitions 
and their respective waveforms is clearly drawn; the 
former are modifications of the physical state of a 
medium, or phenomena, while the latter are 



manifestations, representations, or visualizations of 
these phenomena \ see 2.2 and 2.3.1 of IS 14501 
(Part I)]. 

NOTE — Throughout the remainder of this standard, the terms 
'pulse' and 'pulse waveform' an; used in the following 
inclusive sense: 

a) 'P - ilsc' and 'pulse waveform' include 'transition' and 
'transition waveform', respectively; and 

b) In so far as is applicable, pulse' and 'pulse waveform' 
include 'wave' and 'waveform', respectively 



IS 14501 < Part 2 ): 1998 



4.2 Description of the Pulse Measurement Process 

The object of any pulse measurement process is the 
determination, within some limits of error, either 
expressed or implied, of the magnitude of a 
characteristic, property or attribute of a pulse. 
Figure 3 shows the constituent steps of any pulse 
measurement process where, as indicated, the process 
involves two distinct sequential sub-processes: 

a) Pulse to pulse waveform conversion, and 

b) Pulse waveform analysis. 

Thus, the pulse measurement process involves: 

— the conversion of a pulse into its transform, its 
pulse waveform; 

— analysis of the pulse waveform to determine 
the magnitude of a pulse waveform 
characteristic, 

— the assertion or assumption that the magnitude 
of the pulse waveform characteristic thus 
determined is, within some limits of error, 
identical to the magnitude of the pulse 
characteristic. 



The .validity of final assertion or assumption is 
dependent on the combined validity of the first two 
steps. 

The vast array of devices, apparatus, instruments and 
techniques which may be configured in virtually 
limitless combinations to provide pulse to pulse 
waveform conversion renders the discussion of 
specific implementations beyond the scope of this 
standard. Such discussion is deferred to other 
standards, recommendations, documents or 
specifications which describe or define the 
characteristics or methods concerned with specific 
devices, apparatus, instruments or techniques. 

A state of statistical control shall be achieved before a 
pulse measurement process can be considered to be a 
realization of a method of pulse measurement. 

4.3 Pulse to Pulse Waveform Conversion 

Item (a) of Fig. 3 shows the five basic operations — 
transduction, transmission, conversion, correction and 
storage — which, in some sense, are always present in 
pulse to pulse waveform conversion. The order in 
which these basic operations occur is not necessarily 



OPERATION 



TRANSDUCTION 



°) 



TRANSMISSION 



CONVERSION 



AGENCY PULSE 



TRANSDUCER 



I 



SIGNAL PATH 



I 



INSTRUMENT 



AUXILIARY OPERATIONS 



/ 



TIME AND 
MAGNITUDE STANDARDS 



TRANSFER FUNCTION 
INFORMATION 



CORRECTION 



OPERATOR 
ALGORITHM OR INSTRUMENT 



STORAGE 



b) 



ANALYSIS 



PULSE WAVEFORM 



I 



OPERATOR 
ALGORITHM OR APPARATUS 



REFERENCE MAGNITUDES 



PULSE CHARACTERISTIC 

a) = Pulse to pulse waveform conversion. 

b) = Pulse waveform analysis. 



Fig. 3 Pulse Measurement Process 



IS 14501 ( Part 2 ) : 1998 



that shown in the figure and, frequently, an operation 
occurs more than once. 

Three of the basic operations, transduction, 
transmission and conversion involve apparatus or 
devices whose transfer functions must be known to 
limits of error consistent with the overall limits of error 
desired in the pulse measurement process. The 
determination of transfer functions is indicated in item 
(a) of Fig. 3 by the broken lines leading to auxiliary 
operations. In these auxiliary operations, which may 
be other pulse measurement processes, the transfer 
functions of the apparatus are: 

a) adjusted to predetermined values, that is, the 
apparatus is calibrated, or 

b) determined and retained for subsequent use in 
the correction operation. 

Item (a) of Fig. 3 also shows that the determination or 
adjustment of transfer functions entails comparison, 
either directly or indirectly, with basic or derived time 
and magnitude standards. 

The following clauses describe each of the five 
operations which are present in pulse to pulse 
waveform conversion. 

4.3.1 Transduction 

Pulses propagate in numerous modes in gases, liquids, 
solids, in vacuum and in networks made up of such 
media. In transduction, a device or apparatus abstracts 
energy from the medium in which the pulse propagates 
and converts the energy to a form suitable for 
transmission. 

4.3.2 Transmission 

Transmission may occur over signal paths which 
utilize radiative, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or 
mechanical phenomena or analogue to digital or 
digital to analogue conversion techniques. 

4.3.3 Conversion 

Typically, the conversion operation involves an 
instrument which relates its input signal to real or 
equivalent time. 

Such an instrument may provide a display of the 
relationship of the input signal to time. Such displays 
frequently function as the storage operation 
(see 4.3.5). Display is not necessarily an attribute of 
the conversion operation. 

4.3.4 Correction 

The correction operation combines the results of the 
conversion operation with the transfer function 
information to yield a pulse waveform which is a more 
accurate transform of the pulse. Correction may be 
effected by: (a) a mental process by an operator, (b) a 
computational process, or (c) a compensating device 



or apparatus. Correction shall be performed with limits 
of error which are consistent with the overall limits of 
error desired in the pulse measurement process. 

4.3.5 Storage 

Storage is a transitional operation between pulse to 
pulse waveform conversion and pulse waveform 
analysis. Storage may be effected in numerous ways 
and display is not required, but the stored data must be 
available or retrievable for pulse waveform analysis. 
Typically, storage is effected in one of the waveform 
formats defined in 3.3. 

5 PULSE WAVEFORM ANALYSIS 

5.1 Generality of Pulse Waveform Analysis 

Pulse waveform analysis has broad utility since, when 
it is combined with waveform epoch expansion and 
contraction or applied to waveforms which are 
produced by operations on pulse waveforms [see 5.5.1 
of IS 14501 (Part 1)], its principles and techniques 
apply to: 

a) transition waveform analysis, 

b) analysis of complex waveforms, 

c) analysis of the constituent pulse waveforms of 
a pulse train or pulse burst, and 

d) analysis of the top and base envelopes of a 
pulse burst. 

and are necessary for: 

i) analysis of the time relationships between 

different waveforms, and 
ii) analysis of distortion, jitter and fluctuation. 

5.2 Waveform Epoch Determination 

5.2.1 Selection of the Pulse Waveform Epoch 

A pulse waveform epoch [see 2.3.2 of IS 14501 
(Part 1)] is the span of time for which waveform data 
are known or knowable and any analysis is based on 
the data within the epoch. These data may be 
augmented by reference lines which are determined by 
waveform epoch expansion or -contraction. In any 
pulse measurement process, sufficient data shall be 
present to yield base and top magnitudes [see 3.2. 1 and 

3.2.2 of IS 14501 (Part 1)] which are consistent with 
the limits of error desired in the pulse measurement 
process. 

5.2.2 Exclusion of Data from Analysis 

Data in a pulse waveform epoch may be excluded from 
the analysis under certain conditions, for example: 

— base magnitude may be determined solely 
from data which precede the first transition. 

— a pulse waveform may include feature or 
events which are non-pertinent in the 
circumstances of or to the application of the 



IS 14501 ( Part 2 ) : 1998 



pulse. Non-pertinent data may be excluded 
from analysis. However, such exclusions may 
only be made on the basis of demonstrable 
information or knowledge. 

When data within a pulse waveform epoch are ex- 
cluded from analysis, the following shall be specified: 

— the extent, in time/or magnitude, of the 
excluded data; 

— the demonstrable information or knowledge 
which justifies the exclusion; and 

— whether the excluded data are ignored (that is, 
the waveform which is analyzed is 
discontinuous) or replaced (that is the 
excluded data are replaced with other assumed 
or derived data). 

5.3 Analysis of the Single-Pulse Waveform 

Pulse waveform analysis may be effected by: 

a) a mental process by an operator, 

b) a computational process, or 

c) an apparatus or instrument. 

In all cases, the pulse waveform is operated upon by 
the analyzing algorithm(s) and the same principles 
apply regardless of the pulse waveform format or the 
analyzing agency. Throughout this clause, it is 
assumed that the analysis is performed by a computing 
device since this method: 

a) is the most general, 

b) is potentially the most accurate, and 

c) fully illustrates the operations which an 
operator or apparatus shall, in some sense and 
to some limits of error, perform. 

The analysis of the single pulse waveform requires the 
sequential determination of the: 

— base magnitude and top magnitude; 

— pulse amplitude; 

— proximal, mesial, and distal lines and points; 
and 

— magnitudes of all other pulse waveform 
characteristics expressed as computed 
differences between line and/or point pairs. 

Typically, each of the above determinations is a 
necessity for the succeeding determination. Thus, 
algorithms for the determination of base magnitude, 
top magnitude and pulse amplitude only are described 
below since the determination of all other pulse 
waveform characteristics proceeds directly from these 
determinations [see 3 of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. 

5.3.1 Base and Top Magnitude Algorithms 

In the following clauses, algorithms for determining 
base magnitude and top magnitude are described 



together. There is, however, no requirement to use the 
same algorithm for both determinations. 

53.1.1 Mean of density distribution 

The algorithm is based on determinations of the means 
of the occurrence density distribution of a pulse 
waveform. A graphical description follows: 

a) Assume that a pulse waveform, such as that 
shown in Item a) of Fig. 4 has a superimposed 
rectangular grid in which each elementary rec- 
tangle has dimensions At and Am. 

b) Develop the occurrence density histogram as 
follows: 

i) For each horizontal element, of width m, 
count the number of elementary rec- 
tangles through which the pulse 
waveform passes. 

ii) At the magnitude corresponding to the 
location of the horizontal element, draw 
a histogram element whose length is 
proportional to the count in Item (a). This 
procedure yields the truncated bimodal 
histogram of Item b) of Fig. 4, in which 
Pb, the base histogram, and Pr, the top 
histogram, are identified. 

c) Consider the histograms Pb and Pr separately 
and calculate the magnitudes (on the mag- 
nitude axis) of the means of Pb and Pr and take 
the magnitudes of these means as the base line 
magnitude and the top line magnitude, respec- 
tively. 

This algorithm is best suited to the analysis of pulse 
waveform with bases and tops of significant relative 
duration when the smallest error in the analysis is 
desired. 

A graphical solution yields crude results, but as A t and 
Am become smaller, numerical calculation of the 
magnitudes of the means of the Pb and Pr yields more 
refined measures of the base line magnitude and top 
line magnitude respectively. 

5.3.1.2 Mode of the density distribution 

This algorithm is based on determinations of the 
modes of the occurrence density distribution of a pulse 
waveform and is identical to the algorithm described 
in 5.3.1.1 above, except for 5.3.1.1 (c). 

This algorithm is best suited to the analysis of pulse 
waveforms with bases and tops of significant relative 
duration when results which are compatible with 
visual observation and mental analysis by an operator 
are desired. 



IS 14501 { Part 2 ): 1998 




a) Pulse waveform with superimposed grid 

b) Probability density histogram 

Fig. 4 Graphical Determination of Occurrence Density 



5.3.1.3 Peak magnitude 

Determine the positive peak and negative peak 
magnitudes of the pulse waveform: 

a) take the positive peak magnitude as the top 
(base) magnitude of a positive (negative) pulse 
waveform, and 

b) take the negative peak magnitude as the base 
(top) magnitude of a positive (negative) pulse 
waveform. 

This algorithm is best suited to the analysis of pulse 
waveforms with bases (tops) of negligible or relatively 
short duration. 

5.3.1.4 First (last) base point 

Determine the magnitude of the first (last) base point 
[see 3.3.5.2 of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. Take the magnitude 
of the first (last) base point as the base magnitude. 

5.3.2 Pulse Amplitude Algorithms 

5.3.2.1 Determination of pulse amplitude by the 
integral technique 

Pulse amplitude is the algebraic difference between 
the top magnitude and the base magnitude [see 3.2.3 
of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. Where the absolute magnitude 
of the base (or top) magnitude is either immaterial in 
a pulse waveform analysis or known from other 
measurements, the determination of pulse amplitude is 
sufficient. 

Figure 5 illustrates the determination of pulse 
amplitude by the integral technique wherein the pulse 



waveform e u (0> whose pulse amplitude is unknown, 
and a practical reference pulse waveform et(f) are 
alternately delivered to an instrument: 

— which has an input impedance of R ohms, 

— which can perform the integrations shown in 
equations (1) and (2), below, and 

— which indicates when the equalities specified 
in equations (1) and (2) are satisfied. 



la tn 

]e u (t) dt = ] 



e T (t) dt 



...(1) 



'id 

I 



•n 

J. 



(1//?) J [te u (t)Y dt = (\/R) J [e r (t)Y dt ...(2) 

when the equalities are satisfied, the pulse amplitude 
of the unknown pulse waveform, e u (r), is taken as 
equal to the pulse amplitude of the practical reference 
waveform, eft). It is not necessary to evaluate the 
integrals of e a (t) and er(t) between identical limits; in 
fact, as is indicated for e u (f) in Fig. 5 it is preferable to 
adjust the extent of the integration(s) so that distortions 
which precede and follow the pulse waveform(s) do 
not contribute to the integral(s). 

This algorithm is best suited to analysis in which an 
unknown pulse waveform and a practical reference 
pulse waveform with very nearly identical pulse 
shapes are compared. 

A reference pulse waveform may be specified by any 
of the waveform formats defined in 3.3. The charac- 



IS 14501 (Pai*2): 1998 




Fig. 5 Determination of Pulse Amplitude by the Integral Technique 



tcristics of the devices, apparatus, techniques or algo- 
rithms used in producing or deriving a reference pulse 
waveform shall be specified. 

5.3.3 Determination of the Other Pulse Characteristics 

When (a) the base magnitude and top magnitude, or 
(b) the base magnitude and pulse amplitude of a pulse 
waveform have been determined, the determination of 
all other pulse characteristics follows directly from 
existing definitions of: 

a) proximal, mesial, and distal lines and points 
[see 3.2.5 and 3.2.6 of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. 

b) the magnitudes of all other pulse waveform 
characteristics as computed differences be- 
tween line and/or point pairs [see 33 of 
IS 14501 (Part 1)]. 

6 ANALYSIS OF TRANSITION WAVEFORMS 

Transition waveform analysis is a special of pulse 
waveform analysis in which the analysis is made on a 
specified transition waveform of a pulse waveform. 
Waveform epoch expansion may be used to establish 
the time and magnitude reference lines required in a 
transition waveform analysis. 

7 ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX WAVEFORMS 

Typically, the analysis of complex waveforms 
involves: 

— decomposition of the complex waveform into 
more elementary constituent pulse waveforms, 
or 

— conversion of a multiplicity of constituent 
elements into pulse waveforms. 

— In any analysis of complex waveforms, the 
algorithms or procedures used in 
decomposition or conversion shall be 
specified. 



7.1 Analysis of Combinations of Pulses and 
Transitions 

Double pulse, bipolar pulse or staircase waveforms 
[see 5.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)] may be analyzed by 
decomposing the waveform into constituent pulse and 
transition waveforms. Typically, the decomposition is 
effected by subdividing the waveform at specified time 
reference points. 

7.2 Analysis of Waveforms Produced by Mag- 
nitude Superposition 

Offset or composite waveforms [see 5.2 of IS 14501 
(Part 1)] may be. analyzed by decomposing the 
waveform into its constituent constant, pulse 
waveforms and transition waveforms. Typically, the 
decomposition is effected by a process which is the 
inverse of magnitude superposition. 

7.3 Analysis of Waveforms Produced by Pulse 
Trains 

The constituent pulse waveforms of a pulse train 
[see 5.3.1 of IS 14501 (Part 1)] may be analyzed by 
decomposition. Typically, the decomposition is 
effected by sub-dividing the pulse train into pulse train 
epochs [see 5.3.2.8 of IS 14501 (Part 1)1 each of which 
includes a single constituent pulse waveform. 

7.4 Analysis of Waveforms Produced by Pulse 
Bursts 

The constituent pulse waveforms of a pulse burst 
[see 5.4.1 of IS 14501 (Part 1)] may be analyzed in a 
manner identical to that described in 7.3. 

The overall characteristics of a pulse burst may be 
analyzed by conversion of the pulse burst into its pulse 
burst top envelope and pulse burst base envelope 
[see 5.5.2 and 5.5.3 of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. These 
envelopes are then analyzed as single pulse 
waveforms. 



8 



IS 14501 (Part2): 1998 



8 ANALYSIS OF TIME RELATIONSHIPS 
BETWEEN DIFFERENT WAVEFORMS 

The time relationships between different waveforms 
may be analyzed by: 

a) applying the methods described in 5, 6 and 



# til 11 IV CAIIMHJ i7IO V* U'V V*" tVivni " ** » viw* »*at> 



and 
b) determining the time relationship between 
different waveforms [see 6 of IS 14501 (Part 
1 )] as computed intervals or durations. 

9 ANALYSIS OF PULSE WAVEFORM 
DISTORTION 

Pulse waveform distortion and pulse waveform feature 
distortion entail the determination of the differences 
between a pulse: 

— waveform and a reference pulse waveform [see 
7.1 of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. In any distortion 
determination, the type of reference pulse 
waveform, which may be any of the types 
defined in 3.5, shall be specified. 

When the reference pulse waveform is a practical 
reference pulse waveform or a defined reference pulse 
waveform, it shall be properly located, in time and 
magnitude, relative to the pulse waveform being 
analyzed. When the reference pulse waveform is a 
derived reference pulse waveform, its location relative 
to the waveform being analyzed is fixed by definition 
and shall not be altered. 

10 ANALYSIS OF JITTER AND 
FLUCTUATION 

The measurement of jitter only or fluctuation only in 
the substantial absence of the other is, typically, a 
relatively straightforward process. When, however, 



jitter and fluctuation are both present in significant 
amounts, these components shall be separated. 
Typically, separation is accomplished by first 
measuring fluctuation at points of zero waveform 
slope and subsequently applying the known 
fluctuation as a correction in the determination of 
jitter. 

10.1 Analysis of Jitter 

The analysis of jitter involves: 

a) the repeated determination of a time charac- 
teristic of the constituent pulse waveforms in a 
pulse train, and 

b) the determination of the instability of the 
measured time characteristic with respect to a 
reference time, interval or duration [see 7.3.1 
of IS 14501 (Part 1)]. 

Jitter analysis thus involves the application of the 
methods of measurement described in 5, 6, 7 and 8 as 
required to a multiplicity of the constituent pulse 
waveforms in a pulse train. 

10.2 Analysis of Fluctuation 

The analysis of fluctuation involves: 

a) the repeated determination of a magnitude 
characteristic of the constituent pulse 
waveforms in a pulse train, and 

b) the determination of the instability of the 
measured magnitude characteristic with 
respect to a reference magnitude characteristic 
[serf 3.2 of IS 14501 (Part 1 )]. 

Fluctuation analysis thus involves the application of 
the methods of measurement described in 5, 6, 7 and 
8, as required, to a multiplicity of the constituent pulse 
waveforms in a pulse train. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. LTD 21 ( 1431 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMB AI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



/337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 

f 60 38 43 
160 20 25 

f235 0216,235 04 42 
123515 19,235 23 15 

/832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed *t Simco Printing Prcn, Delhi, India 



