**************** 



-k is^ 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

"^^ ^ ^ ^ % ?R^" 

Jawaharlal Nehru 

Step Out From the Old to the New 



^viiT'jsiS'SfS^^^^*?*:: 





li^ i/ir w w w w w WW ^ ^ ^ tIt w w w 



BLANK PAGE 



^<ii^ 





UI> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 10303:1993 
ISO 6749: 1984 

^ ( Reaffirmed 1999) 

( "tr^HT 5?r^'t^TiT ) 

Indian Standard 
EARTH-MOVING MACHINERY — PRESERVATION 

A!NU C5lUHAl3t 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 62r878/-879 



® BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1993 Price Group 3 



Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 07 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 6749 : 1984 'Earth-moving machinery— Preser- 
vation and storage', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Bulk Handling Equip- 
ment Sectional Committee (HMD 7) and approval of the Heavy IVIechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 

This Indian Standard was first published in 1982. Consequent upon the revision of ISO 
standard, this standard is being revised by adopting the ISO standard under dual number 
system. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without devia- 
tions. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they 
should be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current 
practice is to use a point ( . ) as a decimal marker. 

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 

IS 10280 : 1993 'Earth-moving machinery — Operation and maintenance — Format and 
content of manuals' ( i//JQ'e/'p/-//?0 is a necessary adjunct to this standard and may cover the 
information required to be included in the operator's manual in accordance with 4.1 .6 of this 
standard. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 
1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)'. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off values should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



IS 10303 : 1993 
ISO 6749 : 1984 



Indian Standard 
PARTH.MOVING MACHINERY — PRESERVATION 

AND STORAGE 

( First Revision ) 



1 Scope 

This International Standard specifies the general methods for 
preservation and rennoval of preservation materials from earth- 
moving machinery and its elements, and the categories of 
storage and transportation conditions. 



2 Field of application 

This International Standard is applicable to newly- 
manufactured earth-moving machines as well as to those 
already in use to be preserved. 



3 Definitions 

For the purpose of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply : 

3.1 preservation : Set of operations to be carried out by the 
manufacturer, the user and others for the purpose of protecting 
a machine against the corrosive action of the environment and 
against minor damage that might occur during handling, 
transportation and storage. 



4 Preservation 
4.1 General 

4.1.1 Preservation treatment consists of preliminary oper- 
ations possibly involving some dismantling, marking, prep- 
aration for preservation, the preservation proper, and final 
packaging. 

4.1.2 Preservation of a newly-manufactured machine and its 
elements, unless otherwise stipulated in the order or the con- 
tract of sale, shall be carried out by the manufacturer. 

4.1.3 All materials used for the preservation of a machine and 
its elements shall conform to the specifications laid down in 
International Standards or other appropriate technical 
documents specified in the order or contract of sale, and shall 
ensure conservation of a machine for the intended period of 
preservation, 

4.1.4 A machine shall be delivered for preservation treatment 
without any traces of corrosion on metal surfaces, or damage 
to paintwork, metallic, or other coatings. 

A used machine shall be reconditioned prior to preservation. 



3.2 transportation : Conveyance of a machine by any mode 
of transport, i.e., rail, road, sea, river and air. 

3.3 storage : Period during which a machine is kept idle 
from the moment preservative is applied until the moment the 
preservative is removed. 

3.4 removal of preservatives : Set of operations to be car- 
ried out by the dealer, the user and/or others prior to putting a 
machine into service. 



4.1.5 Preservation treatment shall be carried out in suitable 
conditions (ambient temperature, humidity) and with the cor- 
rect materials which provide for the required quality of preser- 
vation W; +3 taking due care to ensure the safety of personnel 
and protection of the environment. 

4.1.6 Each machine given the preservation treatment shall be 
provided with instructions for the removal of preservatives. 

These instructions may be included as a separate chapter in the 
operator's manual. 



IS 10303 
ISO 6749 



1993 
1984 



4.1.7 The instructions for preservation and removal of preser- 
vatives shall be packed in a labelled waterproof envelope and 
attached to the machine in a conspicuous place. 

4.1.8 The instructions for removal of preservatives shall 
specify the categories of conditions for storage and transporta- 
tion, the date of preservation, and the duration of validity x»f 
preservation. 

The instructions shall also specify the methods fonhe removal 
of preservatives and reassembly of dismantled elements, d list 
of tools and appliances needed for these operations. 

4.1 .9 Operations of preservation and removal of preservatives 
shall be carried out with due regard for the general accident 
preventidn measures specified, if necessary, by the national 
governirig body having jurisdiction. 

4.1.10 Full details concerning preservation, packing and 
transpoi^ation shall be specified by the manufacturer in special 
instructions included with the machine documentation upon 
request^ for example 

a) a method of lifting the machine for loading and/or 
unloading in order to keep preservatives intact; 

b) particular requirements, such as operations necessary 
when a machine is to be transferred from one mode of 
transportation to another which may require unpacking, in- 
cluding a procedure for re- preservation. 

4.1.11 It is important to ensure that tyres, hoses, etc. are 
protected against damage or deterioration by preservatives, by 
solvents used near them, and by exposure to the sun, moisture 
and other natural occurrences. 



4.2 Preliminary operations 

4.2.1 Partial dismantling and marking 

4.2.1.1 Partial dismantling shall be kept to a minimum and 
shall be carried out : 

a) to give preservation treatment to inaccessible areas; 

b) to safeguard protruding elements or easily damageable 
parts against damage or loss; and 

c) to bring down the overall dimensions of a fnachine 
within the limits of transportation size specified in Interna- 
tiona! Standards or other documents specified in the order 
or contract of sale. 

4.2.1.2 When dismantled elements are to be attached to the 
base machine they shall be so secured that they may not shift 
or be damaged or lost during handling or transportation. 



4.2.1.4 Dismantled elements and their corresponding mating 
surfaces on the base machine may be appropriately marked to 
guide correct reassembly. Tags used for marking dismantled 
elements should be of waterproof material. 

4.2.2 Preparation of surfaces for preservation 

4.2.2.1 Surfaces of a machine and its dismantled elements re- 
quiring protection shall be cleaned and be free of corrosion, oil, 
and other contaminants, and dried. 

4.2.2.2 Aqueous alkali solutions, organic solvents, blasting 
with abrasives or any other suitable means which ensure the re- 
quired degree of cleanliness and do not cause damage to the 
machine can be used for cleaning and degreasing the outer sur- 
faces. 

The cleaning method shall be chosen depending on the struc- 
tural features and degree of soiling and the type of outer 
coatings present. 

4.2.2.3 Preparation of surfaces by means of alkali solutions 
shall be carried out in washing installations with such solutions 
and by such procedures that ensure the required degree of 
cleanliness and degreasing. 

4.2.2.4 If organic solvents are used, the areas to be preserved 
shall be wiped with soft rags or brushes wetted with solvent. 

4.2.2.5 If blasting with £|brasives is used, the surfaces shall be 
cleaned by blowing with high-velocity jet of water or air con- 
taining fine abrasive particles. 

4.2.2.6 After cleaning, the surfaces shall be thoroughly dried 
to remove traces of solvents and moisture by one of the follow- 
ing methods : 

a) blowing with a jet of filtered, dry, compressed air; 

b) heating in a temperature-controlled oven; 

c) wiping with clean rag or paper; or 

d) subjecting to the action of IR rays or any other suitable 
means that will not damage the surfaces. 

4.3 Preservation procedurt»s and types of 
protective coatings 

4.3.1 The preservation method and the type of protective 
coating shall be chosen depending on the structural features 
and the materials of the machine, preservation duration, 
storage and transportation conditions with due regard for the 
amount of labour needed and the availability of materials re- 
quired for removing the preservative coatings. 



4.2.1.3 Fastenings used to attach the dismantled elements 
shall also be given the preservation treatment, and wherever 
possible, shall be secured to appropriate mating surifacos to 
guard against loss. 



4.3.2 Preservative coatings shall be applied to those metallic 
surfaces which, if corroded, may deteriorate the operational 
qualities of the machine; or tlelracl from its (jxlernal ap 
pearanco. 



IS 10303 
ISO 6749 



1993 
1984 



4.3.3 The surfaces of non-vital parts or those of corrosion- 
resistant metals such as copper, nickel, chromium, and bronze 
need not be treated, unless transported by sea. 

Special attention should be given to protecting electrical system 
junction boxes, svwtches, relays, etc. Permanent protective 
coatings should be applied during the assembly process. 

4.3.4 Recommended preservation methods 

4.3.4.1 Inhibitor coatings 

Protective inhibitor coatings recommended are inhibitor paper, 
alcohol or alcohol-aqueous solutions of inhibitors, and 
powdery or other forms of inhibitors capable of protecting the 
machine surfaces. 



4.3.4.3 Application of inhibitor polymer dopes on machine 
surfaces can be carried out by any suitable method which 
ensures a uniform coating without any discontinuities or 
inclusions. 

4.3.4.4 To protect against the influence of the sun, rubber 
elements shall be preserved by coating with light-proof com- 
pounds by means of a brush or by spraying or any other 
suitable method which ensures the required quality of preser- 
vation. 

4.3.5 Other suitable preservation methods can also be prac- 
tised, or a combination of two or more preservation methods 
applied, provided such a procedure does not cause damage to 
the machine. 



4.3.4.1.1 Protection by inhibitor paper : constituent parts of 
machines may be completely wrapped in inhibitor paper with 
sufficient overlapping at joints. 

To protect the elements of heavy machines of complicated con- 
figuration with inhibitor paper, an additional outer protective 
layer such as PVC film, metallic foil, etc. may also be used. 

4.3.4.1.2 Alcohol or aqueous-alcohol solutions of vapour 
phase inhibitors or powdery inhibitors can be applied to 
preserve closed cavities which need to be airtight in the course 
of operation. 

After treating with inhibitor solutions, excess solution shall be 
removed and the machine or its elements dried until the in- 
hibitor crystallizes on the preserved surfaces. All ports and 
cavities shall be covered with inhibitor paper or glued with an 
adhesive polymer film and sealed. 

4.3.4.2 Preservation with oil or dope coatings 

4.3.4.2.1 Preservation of outer surfaces with an oil coating 
shall be carried out by dipping, spraying or other suitable 
method. After the outer surfaces have been treated with oil, 
excess oil shall be allowed to drain away. 

4.3.4.2.2 Preservation of inner surfaces shall be carried out by 
pouring oil into the cavities and subsequently rotating the cor- 
responding moving parts of the machine, or by pumping oil into 
the system to be preserved, or by any other suitable means of 
applying the preserving oil. In this process, care should be 
taken that a uniform film of oil is applied to all surfaces being 
treated. Excess oil shall be allowed to drain away. 

4.3.4.2.3 Inner surfaces of hydraulic systems operating on 
inhibited hydraulic fluids shall be preserved by filling these 
systems with the appropriate operating fluids. 

4.3.4.2.4 Preservative dopes in molten state or dissolved in 
white spirit shall be applied to the machine surfaces by spray- 
ing, coating or other suitable means which ensure the required 
quality of preservation. 

4.3.4.2.5 Any defect i.etected in the preservative coating shall 
he oliniitiiUed by iipplying the same oil or dope. 



4.3.6 Preservatives may be removed by one of the methods 
recommended in table 1 or by any other suitable method which 
does not cause damage to, or detract from, the external ap- 
pearance of the machine. 

Table 1 — Methods recommended for removal 
of preservatives 



Preservation method 


Removal method 


Inhibitor coating on the 
surface 


Unwrap inhibitor paper, blow the 
cavities with hot, dry air or wash with 
soap-soda solution 


Oil or dope coating on the 
surface 


Cleanse with hot water, detergent 
solution or wipe with organic 
solvents and then wash with hot 
water or detergent solution 


Inhibitor polymer coating 
on the surface 


Peel off polymer film by cutting at a 
suitable point 


Coating of light-proof 
compound on rubber sur- 
face 


Wash with detergent 



4.4 Packaging 

4.4.1 Packaging is classified into protective and transport 
packing. 

4.4.2 Protective packing is carried out to prevent or to inhibit 
penetration of moisture or corrosive gases, to delay diffusion of 
inhibitor vapours into outer space and to retain the inhibitor oil 
or dope on the machine surfaces, and to protect the machine 
against termites and rodents in the course of transportation or 
during storage. 

4.4.2.1 The material and the type of protective packing shall 
be chosen depending on the preservative applied, storage dura- 
tion and transportation conditions. Packing materials recom- 
mended are waterproof paper, film, and sealing compounds. 

4.4.2.2 Partial packing can be practised for machine surfaces 
of complicated configurations. 



IS 10303 
tSO 6749 



1993 
1984 



4.4.2.3 If a machine is wrapped in paper or in film, the edges 
shall overlap each other, and the junctions shall be sealed. 



5.1.5 The categories of transportation conditions are listed in 
table 3. 



4.4.3 Transport packing is intended to protect the machine 
against mechanical damage that might occur during handling, 
transportation and storage. 

4.4.3.1 Transport packing used by the manufacturer shall be 
in compliance with International Standards or other documents 
stipulated In the order or contract of sale. 

4.4.3.2 A machine can be shipped without any packing or 
only with partial packing of vital parts, provided such a packag- 
ing does not cause damage to or detract from the external ap- 
pearance of the machine. 



5 Storage and transportation 

5.1 Storage and transportation conditions 

5.1.1 Four categories of severity for storage and transporta- 
tion, depending on the nature of corrosive agents in the 
atmosphere and on storing conditions, are recognized. The 
categories are : 

A — light duty, 

B — medium duty, 

C — heavy duty, and 

D — very heavy duty. 

The category of storage and transportation conditions shall be 
specified by the user (see 5.1.3, 5.1.4, anc) 5.1.5). 

5.1.2 Storage is classified as short-term and long-term. 

5.1.2.1 Short-term storage povers periods up to two months. 
In short-term storage, the machine shall be held ready for im- 
mediate use. 

5.1.2.2 Long-tertti storage covers periods exceeding two 
months. Long-'term storage is classified as 

a) for periods up to one year, 

b) for periods exceeding one year. 

5.1.3 For machines in short-term storage, the normal 
category is A (see 5.1.1), but under very severe corrosive con- 
ditions a higher category may be necessary. 

5.1.4 The categories of long-term storage conditions are 
listed in table 2. 



5.1.6 The categories of storage and transportation for 
dismantled elements shall be the same as the categories of 
storage and transportation of the base machine. 

5.2 Storage sites and conditions 

5.2.1 Machines may be stored under cover, in the open air in 
transport packing, in closed unheated or air-conditiorusd 
premises, or under any other storage site conditions equivalent 
to or better than those recommended by the manufacturer. 

5.2.2 Prior to putting into long-term storage, tfie machine 
shall be inspected and the condition of presefveftion treatment, 
seals, and components shall be checked. 

5.2.3 The machine shall be set horizontally on supports to 
prevent warping of the frame or deformation of pneumatic 
wheels. The clearance between the wheels and the supporting 
surface shall be not less than 8 cm. 

5.2.4 Access o'penings, fuel filler openings, exhaust pipes and 
other openings through which atmospheric precipitations may 
penetrate into the inner cavities of component^mits-arKf-parts, 
shall be tightly closed with caps, plugs, water-resistant 
adhesive tape or other special devices. 

5.2.5 Control levers and pedals shall be set in such positions 
where there is no danger of the machine being set in operation 
accidentally. 

5.2.6 Storage batteries shall be disconnected. The level and 
density of electrolyte shall be in accordance with the recom- 
mendations of the manufacturer. When the machine is put into 
storage for more than one month, storage batteries shall be 
removed from the machine and put into storage in special 
premises. 

5.2.7 Fuel, lubricants, hydraulic fluids, coolants and water in 
tanks shall be filled to the levels recommended by the manufac- 
turer or the national governing body having jurisdiction. 

5.2.8 A machine in long-term storage shall be regularly 
inspected for its external appearance, the condition of pre- 
served surfaces, and the preservatives. 

Preferred inspection intervals for long-term storage are as 
follows : 

— in temperate climatic conditions : every 6 months; 

— in tropical, cold, arctic and coastal climatic conditions : 
every 3 months. 



IS 10303 
ISO 6749 



1993 
1984 



Table 2 — Categories of long-term storage conditions 



Atmosphere 


Content of corrosive agents 
in open atmosphere 


Storage sites 


Storage category in climatic region 


Sulfur Chlorides 


Temperate 


Cold 


Tropical 1 


mg/m3 


mg/m- 

per day 


Dry 


Humid 


Rural, 
forest, 
mountain 


Not over 0,02 


Not over 0,3 


Under cover or in open air In 
transport packing 


C 


C 


B 


D 


In closed unhealed store- 
house 


B 


8 


A 


C 


In air-conditioned storehouse 


A 


A 


A 


A 


Industrial 


From 0,02 
to 2,0 


From 0,3 
to 2,0 


Under cover or in open air in 
transport packing 


D 


D 


D 


D 


In closed unheated store- 
house 


B 


C 


B 


C 


In air-conditioned storehouse 


A 


A 


A 


A 


Coastal 


From 0,02 
to 0,2 


From 2,0 
to 2 000 


Under cover or in open air in 
transport packing 


D 


D 





D 


In closed unheated store- 
house 


C 


C 





C 


In air-conditioned storehouse 


A 


A 


- 


A 



NOTE — The relative humidity in an air-conditioned storehouse should not exceed 70 



Table 3 — Categories of transportation conditions 



Transport 


Transportation condition 


Category 


Land 


On platform car or In open truck 


C 


In rail wagon or in closed truck 


B 


Sea 


On shipxieck with measures to prevent penetration of water 


D 


In ship hold 


C 


River 


In the hold or on deck with measures to prevent penetration of 
water 


B 


Air 


- 


B 



NOTES 

1 In case of transportation by sea or river, if the categories of storage and transportation are different, the more 
exacting of the two shall be taken. 

2 In case of land or air transportation, if the categories of storage and transportation are different, a transporta- 
tion category lesser by one degree shall be taken, provided the transportation duration is not more than 10 % of 
the storage duration (for example, B for C, or A for B). 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Stuidard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked b^ 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSrmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. HMD 7 ( 0174 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text AflFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices j Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 {33 1 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V, 1. P. Road, Maniktola C37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 {37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 | ^^ ^^ ^^' ^^ ^^ '^^ 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Hl^ ^^ ^^' ^^^ ^'^ *^ 

1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 1632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \632 78 91, 63278 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNGW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh. India 



