**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 11701 (1986) : Guide for testing and callibration of 
ultrasonic therapeutic equipment [MHD 15: Electromedical 
Equiment ] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISplUM.ftt* 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard !gj* l**x" 

GUIDE FOR TESTING AND~ '* '' £u m5 " 
CALIBRATION OF ULTRASONIC 
THERAPEUTIC EQUIPMENT 



ULJC 61 5-437-3 : 615 47l : 53 039* 




© Capyrlfhi l*B* 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAS BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SilAEI ZAFAK UABjO 
NEW DELHI IJHM2 

Gf 3 Dertmktr 19S6 



18:11701-1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR TESTING AND 

CALIBRATION OF ULTRASONIC 

THERAPEUTIC EQUIPMENT 

Acoustics Sectional Committee, LTDC 5 

Chairman Representing 

Shri K. D. Pavate Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR),Pilani 

Members 

Shri M. R. Kapoor ( Alternate to 
Shri K. D. Pavate ) 
Shri Sandeep Ahuja Ahuja Radios, New Delhi 

Shri K. R. Gurumurthy (Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Bhatia Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi 

Shri T. R. Wadhwa (Alternate ) 
Shri K. Ghandrachudan Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri P. Ghosh Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shri Shankar ( Alternate ) 
Dr P. N. Gupta Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Col Krishan Lai, Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri B. S. Ruprai ( Alternate) 
Dr V. Mohanan National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri J. S. Monga Bolton Private Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Monga ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Monga Electronic Component Industries' Association 

(ELCINA), New Delhi 

Shri Ghanisham Dass ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Narayan Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. Nagaraj (Alternate) 
Dr ( Kumari ) Shailaja Nikam All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore 

Shri S. S. Murthy ( Alternate ) 
Prop B. S. Ramakrishna Central University, Hyderabad 

Shri S. L. Redey Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay; and 

Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' 
Association, Bombay 

Shri M. M. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Shankaralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shri S. K. Sen Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri W. V. B. Ramalingam ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11701 - 1986 



Representing 
Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 

Cdr P. K. Sinha 

Lt R. S. Datta ( Alternate) 
Superintendent Surveyor of 
Works ( Food ) 
Surveyor of Works I/Food ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Srinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex*offleio Member ) 

Director ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri Pa van Kumar 

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



Panel for Ultrasonic Transducers and Equipment, LTDC 5 : P8 

Department of Electronics, New Delhi 



Convener 
Dr P. N. Gupta 



Members 

Dr V. N. Bindal 
Shri D. P. Goel 

Shri G. M. Pant 

Shri A. S. Ramamurthy 



National Physical Laboratory ( GSIR ), New Delhi 
Central Scientific Instruments Organization 

(GSIR), Chandigarh 
Vibronix Pvt Ltd, Bombay 
Naval Physical & Oceanographic Laboratory, 

Cochin 



IS : 11701 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR TESTING AND 

CALIBRATION OF ULTRASONIC 

THERAPEUTIC EQUIPMENT 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 26 May 1986, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication 
Division Council, 

0.2 This standard covers the testing and calibration of ultrasonic therapeu- 
tic equipment. The technique of measurements is given in Appendix A. 

0.3 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC 
Pub 150-1963 'Testing and calibration of ultrasonic therapeutic equip- 
ment', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC )* 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to apparatus designed for therapeutic use. Such 
apparatus consists of a generator of high-frequency electrical energy and a 
transducer, usually a disk of piezoelectric material, for converting this to 
ultrasound. The transducer is housed in a holder designed for local 
radiation of the ultrasound to the human body. The transducer and 
associated parts with their housing are known as the treatment head. 

1.2 This standard provides suitable methods for calibrating the intensity of 
the ultrasonic beam produced by this apparatus and should enable both 
the manufacturers and the supervising agencies to provide proper labelling 
as set forth herein. 

1.3 This standard relates only to ultrasonic therapeutic equipment employ- 
ing plane circular transducers in accordance with present practice. If 
future developments should lead to other acceptable transducers, 
appropriate provisions will be added to these recommendations. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 11701 - 1986 

1.4 This standard relates only to physical characteristics of the apparatus. 
Therapeutic value and methods of use are not considered. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in 
IS : 1885 ( Part 3/Sec 4 >1966* shall apply. 

3. ACOUSTIC CHARACTERISTICS 

3.1 The ultrasonic output waves produced may be unmodulated or 
modulated. Modulation may be sinusoidal, pulsed or that resulting from 
full or half wave rectification. When the modulation is less than 25 per- 
cent, the wave will be considered unmodulated. 

Note — The degree of modulation is the quotient of the difference and the sum of 
the maximum and minimum pressure amplitudes of the Wave. 

3.2 The effective acoustic power output of a treatment head is the time 
average of the acoustic power, radiated by the treatment head in the 
forward direction into an approximately free field in water, under standard 
conditions (see 6 ). It is expressed in watts. 

3.3 The effective radiating area of a treatment head is 1*11 times the area 
measured at the treatment head face and using a particular circular baffle 
chosen to transmit 90 percent of the effective acoustic power as described 
in 6,3. 

3.4 The effective intensity of ultrasound radiated from a treatment head is 
the quotient of the effective acoustic power output and the effective 
radiating area. It is expressed in watts per square centimetre ( W/cm* ). 

3.5 The maximum intensity of a treatment head is, by convention 4/ir times 
the time average of acoustic power (at maximum setting of output 
controls ) measured near the centre of the treatment head face and using a 
circular baffle, of 1 cm diameter. 

4. SAFETY AND CONTROL FEATURES 

4.1 A meter indicating effective acoustic power output ( as defined in 3.2 ), 
or effective intensity ( as defined in 3.4 ), or both, shall be provided on the 
generator in the form of a meter or calibrated output control device. 

4.2 Ultrasonic therapeutic equipment shall conform to the appropriate 

standards for safety of operation. 

♦Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 3 Acoustics, Section 4 Sonics, ultrasonics and 
under water acoustics. 



IS : 11701 - 1986 

5. TOLERANCES 

5.1 The output meter or control device specified in 4.1 shall indicate the 
effective acoustic power, or the effective acoustic intensity, or both, with an 
accuracy of ± 15% when the output is greater than 50% of the maximum, 
and ± 20% when the output is between 10% and 50% of the maximum. 

5.2 During five hours of continuous operation at maximum output and at 
rated supply line voltage, in water at 30 ± 3°C, the acoustic output shall 
remain constant within ± 15% of its initial value. If the apparatus is 
provided with a power indicating meter, this variation may increase from 
± 15 to ± 20% after the first 30 minutes of operation. 

5.3 The acoustic power shall not vary by more than ± 10% for variations 
of supply line voltage of ± 5%. No manual readjustment of the apparatus 
for compliance with this requirement is permitted. 

5.4 The actual frequency shall not differ by more than ±5% from the 
nominal frequency. 

5.5 Tests for compliance with 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 shall be conducted after the 
treatment head has been immersed in tap water to a depth of 50 cm for a 
period of 48 hours. 

5.6 The temperature of the treatment head face shall not exceed 45°C 
during 10 minutes radiation ( at maximum setting of the output controls ) in 
transformer oil having an initial temperature of 30°C. The volume of oil 
shall be at least two litres and it shall not be agitated or stirred by 
external means. The temperature may be measured with a small thermo- 
couple attached in the centre of the treatment head face. 

5.7 The effective radiating area shall be kept within ± 10% of the rated 

value. 

5.8 The maximum intensity shall be kept within ±10% of the rated 
value. The centre of the 1 cm diameter baffle at which the actual maximum 
intensity is found, shall lie within 1 cm of the centre of the treatment head. 

5.9 The quotient of the maximum and the effective intensity shall not 
exceed two. 

6. CALIBRATION PROCEDURES 

6.1 All measurements shall be made with the treatment head operating 
into an approximately free field in water under standard conditions, 
that is degassed at 30 ± 3°C and under conditions such that no 
cavitation occurs. 

6.2 The effective acoustic power output of a plane treatment head is 
preferably determined by the radiation pressure method. 



IS : 11701 - 1986 

6.3 The effective radiating area of a plane treatment head, as defined in 3,3, 
shall be determined by the use of circular baffles and by measurements of 
the effective acoustic power output. That baffle is found ( by interpolation, 
if necessary) which transmits 90% of the power measured without any 
baffle. This baffle area is then multiplied by I'll to obtain the effective 
radiating area. 

6.3.1 The baffles shall consist of rings whose inner and outer surfaces are 
conical as shown in Fig. 1. The constituent material and design shall be 
such as to provide a degree of acoustic insulation ensuring that the sound 
intensity transmitted through the baffle wall does not exceed 3% of the 
incident intensity. The baffle is bounded at the end which faces the 
treatment head by the circular intersection of the inner and outer cone and 
the diameter of this circle determines the baffle area. The other end of the 
baffle ( the base ) shall have an outer diameter larger than the diameter of 
the radiating area of the treatment head to be tested. The baffles shall be 
centred on the face of the treatment head in such a way that the distance 
between the circular edge of each baffle and the face of the treatment head 
face < A. A set of baffles shall be provided of diminishing diameters in 
steps of 5%, starting from the diameter of the face of the treatment head. 
The number of baffles required depends on the type of treatment head and 
should be sufficient to reduce the transmitted power to about 70% of that 
produced without baffle. In addition, a baffle of 1 cm diameter is needed 
to determine the maximum intensity. 

7. LABELLING 

7.1 Ultrasonic therapeutic equipment shall carry a nameplate, permanently 
attached, on which the following information shall be given: 

a) Frequency of ultrasound in megahertz ( megacycles per second ); 

b) Effective acoustic power output in watts at maximum setting 
of output controls; 

c) Effective intensity in watts per square centimetre, at maximum 
setting of output controls; and 

d) Wave form ( continuous, modulated or pulsed ). 

7.1.1 The maximum intensity shall be indicated in the accompanying 
papers. 

7.1.2 If modulated or pulsed, the output waveform, duty factor and 
repetition rate shall be indicated in descriptive literature accompanying the 
equipment. 

7.2 The effective radiating area of the treatment head ( in square centi- 
metre ) shall be marked on its housing. 



IS : 11701 - 1986 



12-5 B t2-5° 




Fig. 1 Circular Baffle ( Cross-Section Through a Diameter ) 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.2 ) 
TECHNIQUE OF MEASUREMENTS 

A-l. Approximate free field conditions may be obtained by use of suitable 
baffles, lining materials ( for example, rubberized horsehair upholstery 
batting ), size and shape of tank, etc. 

A-2. Degassing of water shall be accomplished by boiling for 15 minutes at 
atmospheric pressure or by subjecting to a reduced pressure of not more 
than 30 mm of mercury for 3 hours. Degassing shall be carried out at 
least once within the 12 hours* period preceding each set of measurements 
unless special storage methods are used. In any case, care shall be taken 
throughout all procedures to minimize re-solution of air in water. 

A-3. Cavitation may be avoided by degassing the water and by keeping the 
ultrasound intensity below that which produces cavitation. This latter 



IS : 11701 - 1986 

procedure may occasionally require an extrapolation in calculating 
maximum output characteristics. It is then necessary to assume that 
extrapolation is justifiable, 

A-4. Radiation pressure measurements shall be made using a sensitive 
element which has a light-weight reflecting interface ( namely, thin metal 
foil backed by air) so arranged as to avoid standing waves. A cone or 
prism of 45° half-angle is convenient. The reflector shall be large enough to 
intercept the entire beam and its nearest point shall be placed between one 
and three transducer diameters from the treatment head face. 

A-5. It is preferable either to use compensating radiation meters, that is, 
radiation meters with which the measurements are made not on the basis of 
displacement of a sensitive part but of the force required to return it to the 
initial state, or to use devices in which the sensitive part is displaced in a 
direction parallel to itself and remains at a constant angle with respect to 
the direction of ultrasonic emission. For example, a torsional spring or a 
float may be used. Damping of the measuring system must be sufficient to 
integrate the modulations of the radiation. The calibration shall be by 
means of standard weights. The effective acoustic power output, in 
watts, is 

2 cos 2 A 

where 

F *= force exerted by the sound beam on the reflector along 

the beam axis, 

c ~ velocity of sound in water, and 

A = angle between the normal to the reflecting surface and the 
beam axis. 

The units for power, force and velocity are : watts, newtons and 
metres per second in the MKSA system and ergs per second, dynes and 
centimetres per second in the CGS system. 

The numerical value of c at 30°C may be taken as 1 510 m/s or 
151 OOOcm/s. 

When the reflection coefficient of the reflecting interface differs 
significantly from unity, the factor 2 in the denominator in the formula must 
be replaced by (1 + r) where r is the intensity reflection coefficient. If 
the force F is measured normal to the reflector, the denominator contains 
cos A instead of cos 2 A. 



T2 18 4S 
\316 41 


f 41 2* 42 

i 41 25 ■ 3 
1 41 29 16 


f 2 63 46 

1 2 53 49 


32 4B OB 



INDIAN STANDARDS IIISTITU T lOtf 

Minsk Bhavflfi, $ Bihadirr Shah Znfar Marti. NEW DELHI 110002* 
Telephones ; 3 3^ 01 SIj 3 31 13 75 Telegrams ; Mi nation ha 

( Common to all oCficu* ) 

* '-Ye stern J Man*XaUy*. £8 MIDC P Mircl. Andhflrl (Cut)- 6 32 02 SC 

BOMBAY 4GO0S3 
tEaitern i 1/14 C. I. T- Scheme VII NF, V* I. F, Rm* 30 24 #9 

Manifcl&li, CALCUTTA 7OO064 
Northern r SCO 446-446, Sector 35-C, 
CHANDlGAftH 160036 

Southern ■ C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 

BranGh Offices 

'Pu*hp-4k\ Nurmohamed Shaikh Maifl. Khanpur. 

AHMADABAD 3B00D1 
'F r Block, Unity Bldg P Nartfifllhatiifl Square, 

BANGALORE D 00002 
Gifigotrl Complflx, Bhidbhada fioid, T. T. Nagar P 6 57 16 

BHDPAl4ti2G03 
PLol No. a2yS3, Uwlfl Road, BHUBANESKWAR 751002 » 3» 27 

B3,'5 P Ward Nfl. 29 r R G. Barua Hand, 6th Byi-lana, — 

6UWAHATI 7SIQ03 
6-A-&EC L L N. Gupla Marg (NimpaJly Stttl&n Ra*d) r 23 10AA 

HYDERABAD 6Q00G1 
R14 Yudhlalsr Mirg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302006 \ 5 ffl 32 

117KIS B S*rwd*yi NafliiNltANPOft 20S006 {|{ JJ J J 

ftlliputra InduftlTtal Etlal* PATNA 800013 S 23 06 

Htntax Bldg ( 2rtd Floor }, Rly Station R»d - 7 60 37 

TRI VAN DRUM 635001 

fnsptttion Qtticts { With Sa l e Point 1-4 

PuBhfWnjali, 206- A Wait High Court Rutf. 2 51 71 

BhirsmpalU EKltnalQn. NAG PUR 440010 
InilUuiton oi Enffinwt ( India! Buildirtfl. 1 332 Shivajl Nag*r, 5 24 35 

PUNE 411005 



»SAl4l njTic? In Bambny li -tit NtiYtlfy CltomU*rp r Gnat Raid, ID U H 

Bam-aaj- 4£0W7 

fSabpl OITir-s In Caku11a fci Al S ChOWrh&h*t Appr&lGlV P.O. Prfncnp STUN 
Slra*t, bkutift T00071 

PMMpU 41 EMU Printing Dilhi. India 



