**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11717 (2000): Vocabulary on Vibration and Shock [MED 28: 
Mechanical Vibration and Shock] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



^f%cf5 cfFcpT c^ fen? ^e^Wfr 

( wcTf ^^sm ) 

Indian Standard 
VOCABULARY ON VIBRATION AND SHOCK 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 17.160:01.040.17 



© BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

'Way2000 Price Group 11 



Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, LM 04 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) which is identical with ISO 2041 : 1990 'Vibration and shock — 
Vocabulary*, issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional 
Committee and approval of the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1985. This first revision has been taken up to align with the latest 
version of ISO 2041 which has been technically revised in 1990. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. In the adopted standard, certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a full point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 



1511717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 



Indian Standard 
VOCABULARY ON VIBRATION AND SHOCK 

( First Revision ) 



Scope 

This International Standard defines terms in 
English relating to vibration and shock. An 
alphabetical index is also provided. 

1 General 

1.1 displacement; relative displacement : A 

vector quantity that specifies the change of position 
of a body, or particle, with respect to a reference 

frame. 

NOTES 

1 The reference frame is usually a set of axes at a mean 
position or a position of rest. In general, the displacement 
can be represented by a rotation vector, a translation vector, 
or both. 

2 A displacement is designated as relative displacement 

If It is measured with respect to a reference frame other 
than the primary reference frame designated in the given 
case. The relative displacement between two points is 
the vector difference between the displacements of the 
two points. 

1.2 velocity; relative velocity : A vector that 
specifies the time-derivative of displacement. 

NOTES 

1 The reference frame is usually a set of axes at a mean 
position or a position of rest. In general, the velocity can 
be represented by a rotation vector, a translation vector, 

or both. 

2 A velocity is designated as relative velocity if it is 

measured with respect to a reference frame other than 
the primary reference frame designated in a given case. 
The relative velocity between two points is the vector 
difference between the velocities of the two points. 

1.3 acceleration : A vector that specifies the 
time-derivative of velocity. 

NOTES 

1 The reference frame is usually a set of axes at a mean 
position or a position of rest. In general, the acceleration 
can be represented by a rotation vector, a translation vector, 

or both. 

2 An acceleration Is designated as relative acceleration 

If it is measured with respect to a reference frame other 
than the inertial reference frame designated in a given case. 
The relative acceleration between two points is the vector 
difference between the accelerations of the two points. 

3 Various self-explanatory nriodifiers, such as peak, average, 
and r.m.s, (root-mean-square), are often used. The time 



Intervals over which the average or root-mean-square values 
are taken should be Indicated or Implied. 

4^ Acceleration may be oscillatory, in which case simple 
harmonic components can be defined by the acceleration 
amplitude (and frequency), or random, In which case the 
r.m.s. acceleration (and bandwidth and probability density 
distribution) can be used to define the probability that the 
acceleration will have values within any given range. 
Accelerations of short time duration are defined as transient 
accelerations. Non-oscillatory accelerations are defined 
as sustained accelerations, If of long duration, or as 
acceleration pulses. If of short duration. 

1 .4 acceleration of gravity, g : The acceleration 
produced by the force of gravity at the surface 
of the Earth. It varies with the latitude and elevation 
of the point of observation. 

NOTES 

1 By international agreement, the value 980,665 m/s^ 
(= 980,665 cm/s2= 386,089 in/s2 = 32,1740 ft/s^) has been 
chosen as the standard acceleration due to gravity (g). 

2 Acceleration magnitude Is frequently expressed as a 
multiple of g. 

1 .5 jerk ; A vector that specifies the time-derivative 
of acceleration. 

1.6 inertial reference system; inertial reference 
frame: A coordinate system in which the laws 
of inertia (classical mechanics) are valid. 

NOTE — An inertial reference system signifies a coordinate 
system which Is fixed in space and, thus, not accelerating. 

1.7 inertia force; inertial force :The reaction 
force exerted by a mass when it is being 
accelerated. 

1.8 oscillation : The variation, usually with time, 
of the magnitude of a quantity with respect to a 
specified reference when the magnitude is 
alternately greater and smaller than some mean 
value. 

1.9 sound : 

(1 ) The sensation of hearing excited by an acoustic 
oscillation. 

(2) Acoustic oscillation of such a character as 
to be capable of exciting the sensation of hearing. 

(3) An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle 
velocity, etc., in a medium with internal forces. 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

1 .10 acoustics ;The science and technology of 
sound, including its production, transmission and 
effects. 

1.11 environment : The agaregate, at a given 
moment, of all external conditions and influences 
to which a system is subjected. [ See induced 
environment (1.12) and natural environment (1 .13).] 

1.12 induced environment : Those conditions 
external to a system generated as a result of 
the operation of the system. 

1.13 natural environment : Those conditions 
generated by the forces of nature and the effects 
of which are experienced by a system when it is 
at rest as well as when it is in operation. 

1.14 preconditioning : The climatic and/or 
mechanical and/or electrical treatment procedure 
which may be specified for a particular system 
so that it attains a defined state. 

1.15 conditioning : The climatic and/or 
mechanical and/or electrical conditions to which 
a system is subjected in order to determine the 
effect of such conditions upon it. 

1.16 excitation; stimulus : An external force 
(or other input) appliecf to a system that causes 
the system to respond in some way. 

1.17 response (of a system) : A quantitative 
expression of the output of the system. 

1.18 transmissibility :The non-dimensional ratio 
of the response amplitude of a system in steady- 
state forced vibratron to the excitation amplitude. 
The ratio may be one offerees, displacements, 
velocities or accelerations. 

1.19 overshoot (undershoot) : If the output of 
a system is changed from a steady valued to a 
steady value B by varying the input, such that 
value B is greater (less) than yl, then the response 
is said to overshoot (undershoot) when the 
maximum (minimum) transient response exceeds 
(is less than) valued. 

NOTE — The difference between the maximum (minimum) 
transient response and the value B is the value of the 
overshoot (undershoot). 

1.20 system : An aggregate of the relevant 
and/or constituent parts of a device. 

1.21 linear system : A system in which the 
response is proportional to the magnitude of the 
excitation. 

NOTE —This definition implies that the dynamic properties 
of each element in the system can be represented by a 
set of linear differential equations with constant coefficients, 



and that the principle of superposition can be applied to 
the system. 

1 .22 mechanical system : An aggregate of matter 
comprising a defined configuration of mass, 
stiffness and damping. 

1.23 foundation : A structure that supports a 
mechanical system. It may be fixed in a specified 
reference frame or it may undergo a motion that 
provides excitation for the supported system. 

1.24 seismic system : A system consisting of 
a mass attached to a reference base by one or 
more flexible elements. Damping is normally 
included. 

NOTES 

1 Seismic systems are usually idealized as single degree- 
of-freedom systems with viscous damping. 

2 The natural frequencies of the mass as supported by 
the flexible elements are relatively low for seismic systems 
associated with displacement or velocity pick-ups. and 
are relatively high for acceleration pick-ups, as compared 
with the range of frequencies to be measured, 

3 When the natural frequency of the seismic system is 
low relative to the frequency range of interest, the mass 
of the seismic system may be considered to be at rest 
over this range of frequencies. 

1.25 equivalent system : A system that may 
be substituted for another system for the purpose 
of analysis. 

NOTE — Many types of equivalence are common in vibration 
and shock technology : 

a) equivalent stiffness; 

b) equivalent damping; 

c) torsional system equivalent to a translational system; 

d) electrical or acoustical system equivalent to a mechanical 
system, etc. 

1 .26 degrees of freedom : The number of degrees 
of freedom of a mechanical system is equal to 
the minimum number of independent generalized 
coordinates required to define completely the 
configuration of the system at any instant of time. 

1.27 single degree-of-freedom system : A 

system requiring but one coordinate to define 
completely its configuration at any instant. 

1.28 multi-degree-of-freedom system: A system 

for which two or more coordinates are required 
to define completely the configuration of the 
system at any instant. 

1.29 continuous system; distributed system : 

A system having an infinite number of possible 
independent configurations. 



NOTE — The configuration of a continuous system is 
specified by a function of a continuous spatial variable, or 
variables, in contrast to a discrete or lumped parameter 
system whicli requires only a finite number of coordinates 
to specify its configuration. 

1 .30 centre of gravity : That point through which 
passes the resultant of the weights of its 
connponent particles for all orientations of the 
body with respect to a gravitational field. 

NOTE — If the field is uniform, the centre of gravity coincides 
with the centre of mass (1 .31 ). 

1 .31 centre of mass : The point associated with 
a body which has the property that an imaginary 
particle placed at this point with a mass equal 
to the mass of a given material system has a 
first moment with respect to any plane equal to 
the corresponding first moment of the system. 

1 .32 principal axes of inertia : For each set of 
Cartesian coordinates at a given point, the values 
of the six moments of inertia of a body Ixixj {ij = 
1, 2, 3) are in general unequal; for one such 
coordinate system, the products of inertia l^ixj 
(i ^y ) vanish. The values of I^ixj {i =J ) for this 
particular coordinate system are called the 
principal moments of inertia and the 
corresponding coordinate directions are called 
the principal axes of inertia. 

NOTES 

1 / ^^ = fxixj dm for i ^j 

3 

where /'2= S jc.^ and jc, and x, are Cartesian coordinates. 

1=1 ^ 

2 If the point is the centre of mass of the body, the axes 
and moments are called central principal axes and central 
principal moments of inertia. 

3 in balancing, the term "principal inertia axis" is used to 
designate the one central principal axis (of the three such 
axes) most nearly coincFdent with the shaft axis of the rotor 
and is sometimes referred to as the "balance axis" or the 
"mass axis". 

1 .33 Stiffness, k : The ratio of change of force 
(or torque) to the corresponding change in 
translationai (or rotational) displacement of an 
elastic element. 

1.34 compliance :The reciprocal of stiffness. 

1 .35 neutral surface (of a beam in simple flexure): 
That surface in which there is no longitudinal 
stress. 

NOTE — It should be stated whether or not the neutral 
surface is a result of the flexure alone, or whether it is a 
result of the flexure and other superimposed loads. 



1811717:2000 
1802041:1990 

1 .36 neutral axis (of a beam in simple flexure) : 
The trace of the neutral surface on any cross- 
section of the beam. 

1.37 transfer function (of a system) : A 
mathematical relation between the output (or 
response) and the input (or excitation) of the system. 

NOTE — It is usually given as a function of frequency, 
and is usually a complex function. [See response (1.17), 
transmissibility (1AQ), transfer impedance (1.44) and 
frequency response (B. 13),] 

1.38 complex excitation : An excitation having 
real and imaginary parts. 

NOTES 

1 The concepts of complex excitations and responses 
were evolved liistorically in order to simplify calculations. 
The actual excitation and response are the real parts of 
the complex excitation and response. If the system is 
linear, the concept is valid because superposition holds 
in such a situation. 

2 This term should not be confused with excitation by a 
complex vibration, or vibration of complex waveform. 
The use of the term "complex vibration" in this sense is 
deprecated. 

1.39 complex response : The response of a 
linear system to a complex excitation. [See the 
notes under complex excitation (1 .38).] 

1.40 complex system parameter : A complex 
quantity that is, or is derived from, the ratio of 
complex excitation to complex response. 

NOTE — Electrical and mechanical impedances are 
examples of complex system parameters. 

1.41 impedance : The ratio of a harmonic 
excitation of a system to its response (In consistent 
units), both of which are complex quantities and 
both of whose arguments increase linearly with 
time at the same rate. The term generally applies 
only to linear systems. [See mechanical impedance 
(1.42).] 

NOTES 

1 The concept is extended to non-linear systems where 
the term incremental impedance is used to describe a 
similar quantity. 

2 The terms and definitions relating to impedance apply 
to systems undergoing sinusoidal vibrations only, 

1.42 mechanical impedance : At a point in a 
mechanical system, the complex ratio of force 
to velocity where the force and velocity may be 
taken at the same or different points in the same 
system during simple harmonic motion. 

NOTE — - For the case of torsional mechanical Impedance, 
the words "force" and "velocity" should be replaced by "torque" 
and "angular velocity". 



1511717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

1.43 direct impedance; driving-point impe- 
dance : In a mechanical sense, the complex 
ratio of the force to velocity taken at the same 
point in a mechanical system during simple 
harmonic motion. [Seethe notes under impedance 
(1 .41 ) and mechanical impedance (1 .42).] 

1 .44 transfer impedance : In a mechanical sense, 
the complex ratio of the force taken at one point 
in a mechanical system to the velocity taken at 
another point in the same system during simple 
harmonic motions. [Seethe notes under impedance 
(1 .41) and mechanical impedance (1 .42).] 

1.45 free impedance : The ratio of the applied 
excitation force phasorto the resulting velocity 
phasor with all other connection points of the 
system free, i.e. having zero restraining forces. 
Free impedance is the arithmetic reciprocal of a 
single element of the mobility matrix. 

NOTES 

1 Histroically, often no distinction has been made between 
blocked impedance and free impedance. Caution sinould, 
therefore, be exercised in Interpreting published data. 

2 While experimentally determined free impedances could 
be assembled into a matrix, this matrix would be quite different 
from the blocked impedance matrix resulting from 
mathematical modelling of the structure and, therefore, would 
not conform to the requirements for using mechanical 
impedance in an overall theoretical analysis of the system. 

1.46 loaded impedance : The loaded electrical 
impedance of a transducer, or the loaded driving- 
point mechanical impedance of a structure, is 
the impedance at the input when the output is 
connected to its normal load or structure. 

1.47 blocked impedance, Zfj: The blocked 
electrical impedance of a transducer, or the bbcked 
driving-point mechanical Impedance of a structure, 
is the impedance at the input when the output 
is connected to a load of infinite mechanical 
impedance. 

NOTES 

1 Blocked impedance is the frequency-response function 
formed by the ratio of the phasor of the blocking or driving- 



point force response at point /to the phasor of the applied 
excitation velocity at pointy, with all other measurement 
points on the structure "blocked", I.e. constrained to have 
zero velocity. All forces and moments required to constrain 
fully all points of interest on the structure have to be mearured 
in order to obtain a valied blocked impedance matri/. 

2 Any changes in the number of measurement points or 
their location will change the blocked impedances at all 
measurement points. 

3 The primary usefulness of blocked impedance is in 
the mathematical modelling of a structure using lumped 
mass, stiffness and damping elements or finite element 
techniques. When combining or comparing such 
mathematical models with experimental mobility data, it is 
necessary to convert the analytical blocked impedance 
matrix into a mobility matrix or vice versa. 

1.48 frequency-response function : The 

frequency-dependent rattoof the motion-response 
phasor to the phasor of the excitation force. 

NOTES 

1 Frequency-response functions are properties of linear 
dynamic systems which do not depend on the type 
of excitation function. Excitation can be harmonic, 
random, or transient functions of time. The test results 
obtained with one type of excitation can thus be used for 
predicting the response of the system to any other type 
of excitation. 

2 Lineartiy of the system is a condition which, in practice, 
will be met only approximately, depending on the type of 
system and on the magnitude of the input. Care has to be 
taken to avoid non-linear effects, particularly when applying 
impulse excitation. Stmctures which are known to be non- 
linear (for example certain riveted structures) should not 
be tested with impulse excitation and great care is required 
when using random excitation for testing such structures. 

3 Motion may be expressed in terms of either velocity, 
acceleration or displacement; the corresponding 
frequency-response function designations are mobility, 
accelerance and dynamic compliance or impedance, 
effective mass and dynamic stiffness, respectively (see 
table 1). 

1.49 frequency range of Interest : Span, in 
Hertz, from the lowest frequency to the highest 
frequency at which, say, mobility data are to be 
obtained in a given test series. 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 



Table 1 — Equivalent definitions to be used for various kinds of measured output/input ratio 




Motion expressed 
as displacement 


Motion expressed 
as velocity 


Motion expressed 
as acceleration 


Term 


Dynamic compliance^) 


Mobility^) 


Accelerance^* 


Symbol 


Xi/Fj 


Yij=yi/Fj 


ai/Fj 


Unit 


m/N 


m/(N.s) 


m/(N.s2) = kg-i 


Boundary conditions 


Fk = 0-,k^j 


Fk = 0\k^j 


Fk=0\k ^j 


See figure 


3 


1 


2 


Comment 


Boundary conditions are easy to achieve ©cperimentaily. 


Term 


Dynamic stiffness 


Blocked impedance 


Blocked effective mass 


Symbol 


F,/xj 


Zy=Fi/Vj 


F,/aj 


Unit 


N/m 


(N.s)/m 


(N.s2)/m = kg 


Boundary conditions 


jcjt = ; /: ^ J 


vk = 0',k^j 


ak-0\k^J 


Comment 


Boundary conditions are very difficult or impossible to achieve experimentally 


Term 


Free dynamic stiffness 


Free impedance 


Effective mass 
(free effective mass) 


Symbol 


Fj/Xi 


1 


Fj/Oi 


Unit 


N/m 


(N.s)/m 


(N.s2)/m = kg 


Boundary conditions 


Fk=0-k^j 


Fk = 0-k^j 


Fk-0\k^j 


Comment 


Boundary conditions are easy to achieve, but results shall be used with great caution 
in system modelling. 


1 ) "Dynamic compliance" is calle 


d "receptance" by several authors. 


2) "l\/1obility" is sometimes called 


"mechanical admittance". A typical plot Is given in figure 1 . 


3) "Accelerance" has unfortunately been called "inertance" in some publications, inertance is not a standard term and is 
not acceptable because it is in conflict with the common definition of acoustic inertance and also contrary to the 
implication carried by the word "inertance". 



1 .50 (meclianical) mobility, Yij The complex ratio 
of the velocity, taken at a point In a mechanical 
system, to the force, taken at the same or another 
point in the system, during simple harmonic motbn. 

NOTES 

1 Mechanical mobility is the inverse of mechanical 
impedance. 

2 Mobility is the frequency-response function formed by 
the ratio of the velocity-response phasor at point i to the 



excitation force phaSor at pointy with all other measurement 
points on the structure allowed to respond freely without any 
constraints other than those constraints which represent 
the normal support of the structure in its intended application. 
A typical plot is given in figure 1 . 

3 The velocity response can be either translationai or 
rotational, and the excitation force can be either a rectilinear 
force or a moment. 

4 If the velocity response measured Is a translationai one 
and if the excitation force applied is a rectilinear one, the 
units of the mobility temn will be m/(N.s) in the SI system. 



IS 11717: 


2000 




ISO 2041 


1990 


180 






90 


"O 







c 




-90 


en 




180 



CO 



E 
5- 



\ H II 



-20 - 



-40 



-60 - 



-80 



-100 - 



10 







j^:^i5^-^ 


'-5^ 


^ess i^ 


X^ f$^ 


A,^ 






-^ 






_^^j^ 






!x:^ 


r ■>« 


1 


i 


1 


1 


- 



20 50 100 200 

Frequency, Hz 

Figure 1 — Mobility plot 



500 1 000 2 000 



E 
o 




500 1 000 2 000 



10 20 50 100 200 

Frequency, Hz 

Figure 2 — Accelerance magnitude plot corresponding to tlie mobility graph plotted in figure 1 

6 



1811717:2000 
180 2041:1990 



2 



01 
■o 



E 



E 
g 
^ 




10 20 



50 100 200 

Frequency, Hz 



500 1 000 2 000 



Figure 3 — Dynamic compliance magnitude plot corresponding to the mobility graph 

plotted in figure 1 



1.51 direct (mechanical) mobility; driving-point 
(mechanical) mobility, Yjj :The complex ratio of 
velocity and force taken at the same point in a 
mechanical system during simple hamnonic motion. 

NOTES 

1 Driving-point mobility is the frequency-response function 
formed by the ratio, in metres per newton second, of the 
velocity-response phasor at point j to the excitation force 
phasor applied at the same point with all other measurement 
points on the structure allowed to respond freely without any 
constraints other than those constraints which represent 
the normal support of the structure in its intended application. 

2 The term "point" designates a location and a direction. The 
term "coordinate" has also been used with the same meaning 
as "point". 

1.52 frequency-averaged mobility magnitude : 

The r.m.s. value of the ratio, in metres per newton 
second, of the magnitude of the velocity response 
at point / to the magnitude of the exciting force at 
the same point, averaged over specified frequency 
bands. 

1.53 transfer(mechanical) mobility : The complex 

ratio of the velocity, taken at one point in a 
mechanical system, to the force, taken at another 



point in the same system, during simple harmonic 
motion. 

NOTE —Transfer mobility is the frequerrcy-response function 
formed by the ratio, In metres per newton second, of the 
velocity-response phasor at point / to the excitation force 
phasor applied at pointy with all points other thany allowed to 
respond freely without any constraints other than those 
constraints which represent the normal support of the 
stmcture in its intended application. 

1.54 dynamic stiffness; dynamic elastic 
constant; dynamic spring constant, /c«: 

(1) The ratio of change of force to change of 
displacement under dynamic conditions. 

(2) The complex ratio of force to displacement 
during simple harmonic motion. 

NOTES 

1 The dynamic stiffness may be dependent upon strain 
(amplitude and/or spectrum), strain-rate, temperature or 
other conditions. 

2 The dynamic stiffness, /c •, of a linear translational 
single-degree-of-freedom system characterized by the 
equation. 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 



m + c -p + AJC = F 

d/ 

where F = FqS''"', is equal to 

In these equations, 

m is the mass; 

X is the displacement; 

t Is the time; 

c is the linear (viscous) damping coefficient; 

k is the elastic (spring) constant; 

Fq is the force amplitude; 

e is the base of natural logarithms; 

i= v^ 

0) is the angular frequency; 
(Wq is the undamped natural frequency; 
is the displacement amplitude. 

1.55 apparent mass; effective mass: The 

complex ratio of force to acceleration during simple 
harmonic motion. 

NOTE — The ratio of force to acceleration, when the 
acceleration is given in terms of g, is sometimes called 
effective weight or effective load. 

1 .56 spectrum : A description of a quantity as a 
function of frequency or wavelength. 

NOTE — The term "specturm" may be used to signify a 
continuous range of components, usually wide in extent, 
which have some common characteristics, for example 
audio-frequency spectrum. 

1.57 level (of a quantity) : the logarithm of the 
ratio of the quantity to a reference of the same 
kmd. The base of the logarithm, the reference 
quantity and the kind of level shall be specified. 

NOTES 

1 Examples of kinds of levels in common use are electric- 
power level, sound-pressure level, voltage-squared level. 

2 The level as defined in this International Standard is 
measured in units of the logarithm of a reference ratio that is 
equal to the base of the logarithms. 

3 The definition is expressed symbolically as 



L - \oqr 



where 



L is the level of the kind determined by the kind of 
quantity under consideration, measured in units of 
\oqrr; 

r is the base of the logarithms and the reference ratio; 

q is the quantity under consideration; 



^0 is the reference quantity of the same kind. 

4 A difference in the levels of two like quantities q^ and 
qz is described by the same formula because, by the 
rules of logarithms, the reference quantity is automatically 
divided out as follows: 



logr ( — )- log^ (-^ ) = logr 




5 In vibration terminology, the term "level" may sometimes 
be used to denote amplitude, average value, root-mean- 
square value, or ratios of these values. These uses are 
deprecated. 

1.58 bei : A unit of level when the base of the 
logarithm is 1 0. Use of the bel is restricted to levels 
of quantities proportional to power. [See the notes 
under /ei/e/(1 .57) and decibel{1 .59).] 

1 .59 decibel (dB) : One tentn of a bel. 

NOTES 

1 The magnitude of a level in decibels is ten times the 
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of power-like quantities, 
i.e. 



Lp =^0\OQ^o 



2 Examples of quantities that qualify as power-like 
quantities are sound-pressure squared, particle-velocity 
squared, sound intensity, sound-energy density, voltage 
squared. Thus the bel is a unit of sound-pressure-squared 
level; it is common practice, however, to shorten this to 
sound-pressure level because ordinarily no ambiguity 
results from so doing. 

2 Vibration 

2.1 vibration : The variation with time of the 
magnitude of a quantity which is descriptive of the 
motion or position of a mechanical system, when 
the magnitude is alternately greater and smaller 
than some average value or reference. [See 
oscillation {^. 8).] 

2.2 periodic vibration : A periodic quantity the 
values of which recur for certain equal increments 
of the independent variable. 

NOTES 

1 A periodic quantity, >, Which is a function of time, /, can 
be expressed as 

y=/(n=/{t±nx} 

where 

n is a whole number; 

r is a constant; 

/ is an independent variable. 

2 A quasi-periodic vibration is a vibration which deviates 
only slightly from a periodic vibration. 



2.3 simple harmonic vibration; sinusoidal 
vibration : A periodic vibration that is a sinusoidal 
function of the independent variable. Thus 



y^A sin (£y/+ 0) 



where 



y is the simple harmonic vibration; 

A is the amplitude; 

0} is the angular frequency; 

t is the independent variable; 

is the phase angle of the vibration. 

NOTES 

1 The maximum value of the simple harmonic vibration is 
the amplitude^, 

2 A periodic vibration consisting of the sum of more than 
one sinusoid, each having a frequency which Is a multiple of 
the fundamental frequency, Is often referred to as a complex 
vibration or multi-sinusoidal vibration. The use of the 
term "complex vibration" in this context is deprecated. 

3 A quasi -sinusoidal vibration has the appearance of the 
sinusoid, but varies relatively slowly in frequency and/or in 
amplitude. 

2.4 random vibration : A vibration the magnitude 
of which cannot be precisely predicted for any given 
instant of time. [See random noise (2.7).] 

NOTE — The probability that the magnitude of a random 
vibration is within a given range can be specified by a 
probability distribution function, 

2.5 non-stationary vibration : A random vibration 
that is not stationary. 

2.6 noise : 

(1 ) Any disagreeable or undesired sound. 

(2) Sound, generally of a random nature, the 
spectrum of which does not exhibit clearly defined 
frequency components. 

NOTE — By extension of the above definitions, noise may 
consist of electrical oscillations of an undesired or random 
nature. If ambiguity exists as to the nature of the noise, a 
term such as acoustic noise or electrical noise should be 
used. 

2.7 random noise : A noise the magnitude of 
which cannot be precisely predicted for any given 
instant of time. [See random vibration (2.4) and 
the accompanying note.] 

2.8 Gaussian random noise : A random noise 
whose instantaneous magnitudes have a Gaussian 
distribution. [See Gaussian distribution {A,32).] 

2.9 white noise; white random vibration .White 
noise has equal energy for any frequency band of 



iS 11717: 2000 
180 2041:1990 

constant width (or per unit bandwidth) over the 
spectrum of interest. 

NOTE — White random vibration has a constant mean- 
square acceleration spectral density over the frequency 
spectrum of interest. [See power spectral density (5.1).] 

2.10 pink noise; pink random vibration : A noise 
which has a constant energy within a bandwidth 
proportional to the centre frequency of the band. 

NOTE — The energy spectrum of pink noise as determined 
by an octave bandwidth (or any fractional part of an octave 
bandwidth) filter will have a constant value. 

2.11 narrow-band random vibration : Random 
vibration having its frequency components within 
a narrow band only [See random vibration (2.4).] 

NOTES 

1 The defining of what is meant by "narrow" is a relative 
matter depending upon the problem Involved. It is usually 
equal to or less than 1/3 octave. 

Z The waveform of a narrow-band random vibration has the 
appearance of a sine wave the amplitude and phase of which 
vary in an unpredictable manner. 

2.12 broad-band random vibration : Random 
vibration having its frequency components 
distributed over a broad frequency band. [See 
random vibration (2.4) . ] 

NOTE — The definition of what Is meant by "broad" is a 
relative matter depending upon the problem involved, it is 
usually one octave or greater. 

2.13 dominant frequency : A frequency at which 
a maximum value occurs is a spectral density 
curve. 

2.14 steady-state vibration : A steady-state 
vibration exists if the vibration is a continuing 
periodic vibration. 

2.15 transient vibration : The vibratory motion of 
a system other than steady-state or random. 

NOTE — This term is basically associated with mechanical 
shock {3^). 

2.16 forced vibration [oscillation] : The steady- 
state vibration [oscillation] caused by a steady- 
state excitation. 

NOTES 

1 The vibration (for linear systems) has the same frequencies 
as the excitation. 

2 Transient vibrations [oscillations] are not considered. 

2.17 free vibration; free oscillation : Vibration 
that occurs after the removal of excitation or 
restraint. 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

NOTE —The system vibrates at natural frequencies of the 
system. 

2.18 self-induced vibration; self-excited 
vibration : Vibration of a mechanical system 
resulting from conversion, within the system, of 
non-oscillatory energy to oscillatory excitation. 

2.19 ambient vibration : The all-encompassing 
vibration associated with a given environment, 
being usually a composite of vibration from many 
sources near and far. 

2.20 extraneous vibration : The total vibration 
other than the vibration of principal interest. 

NOTE — Ambient vibration contributes to the magnitude of 
extraneous vibration. 

2.21 aperiodic motion : A vibration that is not 

periodic. 

2.22 cycle (noun) : The complete range of states 
or values through which a periodic phenomenon or 
function passes before repeating itself identically 
[See cyc/e(verb) (2.101).] 

2.23 fundamental period; period : The smallest 
increment of the independent variable of a periodic 
quantity for which the function repeats itself. [See 
periodic vibration (2.2).] 

NOTE — If no ambiguity is likely the fundamental period Is 
called the period. 

2.24 (cyclic) frequency : The reciprocal of the 
fundamental period, 

NOTE — The unit of frequency is the hertz (Hz), which 
corresponds to one cycle per second. 

2.25 fundamental frequency : 

(1) Of a periodic quantity the reciprocal of the 
fundamental period. 

(2) Of an oscillating system, the lowest natural 
frequency The normal mode of vibration associated 
with this frequency is known as the fundamental 

mode. 

2.26 harmonic (of a periodic quantity) : A sinusoia 
the frequency of which is an integral multiple of 
the fundamental frequency 

NOTES 

1 The term overtone has frequently been used in place of 
harmonic, the n*" harmonic being called the (w - 1)*' overtone. 

2 In English, the first overtone and the second harmonic are 
each twice the frequency of the fundamental. In French, the 
distinction between harmonic and overtone does not exist, 
and the second harmonic is twice the frequency of the 
fundamental. The term "overtone" is now deprecated to 
reduce ambiguity in the numbering of the components of a 
periodic quantity. 



2.27 subharmonic : A sinusoidal quantity the 
period of which is an integral submultiple of the 
fundamental period of the quantity to which it is 
related. 

2.28 beats : Periodic variations in the amplitude 
of an oscillation resulting from the combination of 
two oscillations of slightly different frequencies. 
The beats occur at the difference frequency 

2.29 beat frequency : The absolute value of the 
difference in frequency of two oscillations of slightly 
different frequencies. 

2.30 angular frequency; circular frequency : 

The product of the frequency of a sinusoidal quantity 
and the factor 271. 

NOTE —The unit of angular frequency is the radian per unit 
of time. 

2.31 phase angle; phase (of a sinusoidal 
vibration) : The fractional part of a period through 
which a sinusoidal vibration has advanced as 
measured from a value of the independent variable 
as a reference. 

2.32 phase difference; phase angle difference : 

Between two periodic vibrations of the same 
frequency the difference between their respective 
phases or, in the case of sinusoidal vibrations, 
between their phase angles measured from the 
same origin. 

2.33 amplitude : The maximum value of a 
sinusoidal vibration. 

NOTES 

1 This is sometimes called vector amplitude to distinguish 
it from other senses of the term "amplitude", and it is 
sometimes called single amplitude, or peak amplitude, 
to distinguish it from double amplitude, which for a simple 
hamionic vibration is the same as the total excursion (a 
displacement concept) or peak-to-peak value. The use of 
the terms "double amplitude" and "single amplitude" is 
deprecated. 

2 In the vibration theory, the use of "amplitude", for purposes 
other than to describe the maximum value of a sinusoid. Is 
deprecated. 

2.34 peak value; peak magnitude; positive 
(negative) peak value : The maximum value of a 
vibration during a given interval. [ See also 
maximum value (2.40). ] 

NOTE — A peak value vibration is usually taken as the 
maximum deviation of that vibration from the mean value. 
A positive peak value is the maximum positive deviation and 
a negative peak value is the maximum negative deviation. 

2.35 peak-to-peak value (of a vibration) : The 
algebraic difference between the extreme values 
of the vibration. 



10 



2.36 excursion; total excursion (of a vibration) : 
The peak-to-peak displacement. 

2.37 crest factor (of a vibration); peak-to-r.m.s. 
ratio : The ratio of the peak value to the r.m.s. 
value. 

NOTE — The value of the crest factor of a sine wave is ^2 • 

2.38 form factor (of a vibration) : The ratio of the 
r.m.s. value to the mean value for one-half cycle 
between two successive zero crossings. 

NOTE — The form factor for a sinusoid is 7i/2 ^ = 1,111. 

2.39 Instantaneous value; value : The value of a 
variable quantity at a given instant. 

2.40 maximum value : The value of a function 
when any small change in the independent variable 
causes a decrease in the value of the function. 

2.41 maximax : The maximum value that is of 
greatest magnitude when a function contains more 
than one maximum value within a given interval of 
the independent variable. 

2.42 vibration severity : A generic term that 
designates a value, or set of values, such as a 
maximum value, average or rm.s. value, or other 
parameter that is descriptive of the vibration. It 
may refer to instantaneous values or to average 
values. 

NOTES 

1 The vibration severity of a machine is defined by the 
maximum r.m.s. value of the vibration velocities measured 
at significant points of a machine, such as bearings or 

mountings. 

2 The duration of a vibration is sometimes included as a 
parameter descriptive of vibration severity. This usage is 
deprecated. 

2.43 elliptical vibration : A vibration in which the 
locus of a vibrating point is elliptical in form. 

2.44 rectilinear vibration; linear vibration : A 

vibration in which the locus of a vibration point is a 
straight line. 

2.45 circular vibration : A vibration in which the 
locus of a vibrating point is circular in form. This is 
a special case of elliptical vibration. 

2.46 node : A point, line or surface in a standing 
wave where some characteristic of the wave field 
has essentially zero amplitude. 

NOTE — If the nature of the node is not apparent, an 
appropriate modifier should be used, for example 
displacement node, pressure node, etc. 

2.47 antinode; loop : A point, line or surface in a 
standing wave where some characteristic of the 
wave field has a maximum value. 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

NOTE — If the nature of the antinode is not apparent, an 
appropriate modifier should be used, for example 
displacement antinode, pressure, antinode, etc. 

2.48 mode of vibration : In a system undergoing 
vibration, a mode of vibration designates the 
characteristic pattern of nodes and antinodes 
assumed by the system in which the motion of 
every particle, for a particular frequency, is simple 
harnrranic (for linear systems) or has corresponding 
decay patterns. 

NOTE — Two or more modes may exist concurrently in a 
multi-degree-of-freedom system. 

2.49 natural mode of vibration : A mode of 
vibration assumed by a system when vibrating 
freely. 

NOTES 

1 It Xhe system has zero damping, the natural modes are 
the same as the normal modes, [see normal mode (2.55).] 

2 A natural mode of vibration exists for each degree of 
freedom of the system. 

2.50 fundamental natural mode of vibration : 

The mode of vibration of a system having the lowest 
natural frequency, [see fundamental frequency 

(2.25).] 

2.51 mode shape : The mode shape of a given 
mode of vibration of a mechanical system is given 
by the maximum change in position, usually 
normalized to a specified deflection magnitude at 
a specified point, of its neutral surface (or neutral 
axis) from its mean value. The mean value is the 
mean for the given mode of vibration only. 

2.52 modal numbers : When the normal modes 
of a system are identified by sets of integers, these 
integers are called modal numbers. 

2.53 coupled modes : Modes of vibration that 
are not independent but which influence one another 
because of energy transfer from one mode to 
another. 

2.54 uncoupled modes : Modes of vibration that 
can exist in a system concurrently with and 
independently of other modes, no energy being 
transferred from one mode to another. 

2.55 normal mode : A natural mode of an 
undamped mechanical system. 

NOTES 

1 The motion of a system consists of the summation of the 
contribution of each of the participating normal modes. 

2 The terms natural mode, characteristic mode and 

eigen mode are synonymous with normal mode for 
undamped systems. 



11 



IS 11717: 
ISO 2041 



2000 
:1990 



2.56 wave : A modification of tlie physical state 
of a medium, whicii is propagated through the 
medium by virtue of the physical characteristics 
of the medium. 

NOTE — At any point in the medium tlie quantity serving as 
a measure of the disturbances is a function of time and at 
any instant the quantity is a function of position. 

2.57 wave train : A succession of a limited number 
of waves, usually nearly periodic, travelling at the 
same (or nearly the same) velocity. 

2.58 wavelength ( of a periodic wave ) : The 
distance measured perpendicular to the wave front 
in the direction of propagation, between two 
successive points on the wave, which are 
separated by one period. 

2.59 compresslonal wave : A wave of 
compressive or tensile stresses propagated in an 

elastic medium. 

NOTE — A compressional wave is normally a longitudinal 
wave. [See longitudinal wave (2.60).] 

2.60 longitudinal wave : A wave in which the 
direction of displacement caused by the wave 
motion is parallel to the direction of propagation. 

2.61 shear wave : A wave of shear stresses 
propagated in an elastic medium. 

NOTES 

1 A shear wave is normally a transverse wave. [See 
transverse wave (2.62).] 

2 A shear wave causes no changes in volume. 

2.62 transverse wave : A wave of displacement 
of elements of the medium propagated 
perpendicular to the wave front. 

2.63 wave front : 

(1 ) Of a progressive wave in space, the continuous 
surface which is a locus of points where the phase 
is the same at a given instant. 

(2) Of a progressive surface wave, the continuous 
line which is a locus of points where the phase is 
the same at a given instant. 

2.64 plane wave : A wave in which the wave 
fronts are parallel planes. 

2.65 spherical wave : A wave in which the wave 
fronts are concentric spheres. 

2.66 standing wave : A periodic wave having a 
fixed amplitude distribution in space, i.e. the result 



of interference of progressive waves of the same 
frequency and kind. 

NOTES 

1 A standing wave can be considered to be the result o^ 
superposition of opposing progressive waves of the same 
frequency and kind. 

2 Standing waves are characterized by nodes and antinodes 
that are fixed in position. 

2.67 audio frequency : Any frequency of a 
normally audible sound wave. 

NOTE —Audio frequencies generally lie between 20 Hz and 
20 000 Hz. 

2.68 ultrasonic frequency; ultrasonic : a 

frequency lying above the audio frequency range. 

NOTE —The term "ultrasonic" may be used as a modifier to 
indicate a device intended to operate in association with 
ultrasonic vibrations. 

2.69 infrasonic frequency; infrasonic : A 

frequency lying below the audio frequency range. 

NOTE —The term "infrasonic" may be used as a modifier to 
indicate a device intended to operate in association with 
infrasonic vibrations. 

2.70 reverberation : The sound that persists in 
an enclosed space, as a result of repeated reflectbn 
or scattering, after the source of the sound has 
stopped. 

2.71 echo : A wave that has been reflected or 
returned with sufficient magnitude and delay to 
be detected as a wave distinct from that directly 
transmitted and distinguishable as a repetition 
of it. 

2.72 resonance : Resonance of a system in forced 
osclllatbn exists when any change, however small, 
in the frequency of excitation causes a decrease 
in a response of the system. 

2.73 resonance frequency : A frequency at which 
resonance exists. 

NOTES 

1 Resonance frequencies may depend upon the measured 
variables, for example velocity resonance may occur at a 
different frequency from that of displacement resonance. 
(See table 2.) 

2 In case of possible confusion, the type of resonance shall 
be indicated, for example velocity resonance frequency. (See 
table 2). 

2.74 antiresonance : Antiresonance of a system 
in forced oscillatton exists at a point when any 



12 



1811717:2000 
180 2041:1990 



Table 2 — Resonance relations 



Characteristic 



Displacement 
resonance 



Velocity 
resonance 



Damped natural 
frequency 



Frequency, H^ 



Amplitude of displacement 



Amplitude of velocity 



Pliase of displacement with 
reference to applied force 



1 


Jl 

m 


2 

A 




k 


c' 


c 


h 


Am' 

A 


c 

i 


1 + 


c' 


4mk-2c' 



27C 



m 



1 k 



\ m 



2n\ m Am 



Jc_ _ 3 c 
m 16m 



tan 



4 mk 



-2 



A_ 
c 



c 1 + 



^emk-4^ 



tan-^ \ 



16/nit 



-4 



NOTES 

1 In the case of a linear single degree-of-freedom system, the motion of which can be described by the equation 

dx dx 

m — 1+C+ — + Ax = /4 Cosarf 

where 

jc is a displacement; 

G) is the angular frequency; 

m, c and it are constants; 

the characteristics of the different kinds of resonance in terms of the constants of the above equation are as given in the 
table. 

2 For values of cwhich are small compared with ^ink there is little difference between the three cases. The frequency 
at velocity resonance Is equal to the undamped natural frequency of the system. Other symbols are employed for 
electrical resonance. 



change, however small, in the frequency of 
excitation causes an Increase in a response at 
this point. 

2.75 antiresonance frequency : A frequency at 
which antiresonance occurs. 

NOTES 

1 Antiresonance frequencies may depend upon the 
measured variable, for example velocity antiresonance may 
occur at a different frequency from that of displacement 
antiresonance. 

2 In cases of possible confusion, the type of 
antiresonance shall be indicated, for example velocity 
antiresonance frequency, 

2.76 fixed-base natural frequency : A natural 
frequency that a system would have if the 



foundation to which the equipment is attached were 
rigid and of infinite mass. 

NOTE — The equation given in table 2 and the natural 
frequencies shown are for fixed-base conditions. 

2.77 critical speed : A characteristic speed at 
which resonances of a system are excited. 

NOTES 

1 Critical speed of a rotating system is a speed of the 
rotating system that corresponds to a resonance frequency 
(it may also include multiples and submultiples of the 
resonance frequency) of the system, for example speed in 
revolutions per unit time equals the resonance frequency in 
cycles per unit time. 

2 Where there are several rotating systems, there will be 
several corresponding sets of critical speeds, one for each 
mode of the overall system. 



13 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

2.78 subharmonic response; subharmonic 
resonance response : A response of a mechanical 
system exhibiting some of the characteristics of 
resonance at a frequency having a period which is 
an integral multiple of the period of excitation. 

2.79 damping : The dissipation of energy with 
time or distance. 

NOTE — in the context of vibration and shock, damping is 
the progressive reduction of the amplitude with time. 

2.80 undamped natural frequency (of a 

mechanical system) : A frequency of free vibration 
resulting from only elastic and inertial forces of 
the system. 

NOTE — For the equation of motion gi ven in ta ble 2, the 
undamped naturai frequency is (1/2;:) J k/m Hz. 

2.81 damped natural frequency : The frequency 
of free vibration of a damped linear system. (See 
table 2.) 

2.82 viscous damping; linear viscous 
damping : The dissipation of energy that occurs 
when an element or a part of a vibration system is 
resisted by a force the magnitude of which is 
proportional to the velocity of the element and the 
direction of which is opposite to the direction of 
the velocity. 

2.83 equivalent viscous damping : A value of 
linear viscous damping, assumed for the purpose 
of analysis of a vibratory motion, such that the 
dissipation of energy per cycle at resonance is the 
same for the assumed as well as for the actual 
damping force. 

2.84 linear viscous damping coefficient; 
viscous damping coefficient : For linear viscous 
damping, the ratio of damping force to velocity. 
[See linear viscous damping (2.82).] 

2.85 critical damping; critical viscous 
damping : For a single degree-of-freedom system, 
the amount of viscous damping which corresponds 
to the limiting condition between an oscillatory and 
a non-oscillatory transient state of free vibration. 

NOTE —The critical linear viscous damping coefficient, c^,, 
is equal to 



= 2 ^Jmk 



■■ 2mo)n 



for the single degree-of-freedom system represented 
by the equation given in table 2, where coq Is the 
undamped natural frequency (angular). [See undamped 
natural frequency (2.80).] 

2.86 damping ratio; fraction of critical 
damping : For a system with linear viscous 
damping, the ratio of the actual damping coefficient 
to the critical damping coefficient. [See linear 



viscous damping coefficient (2.84) and critical 
damping {2.85).] 

NOTE — The fraction of critical damping may also be 
expressed in terms of percent of critical damping. 

2.87 logarithmic decrement : The natural 
logarithm of the ratio of any two successive 
amplitudes of like sign in the decay of a single- 
frequency oscillation. 

2.88 non-linear damping : Phenomenon 
associated with the energy loss of a system 
whereby the motion of the system cannot be 
charactehzed by a linear differential, integral or 
integro-differential equation with constant 
coefficients. 

2.89 g; Q factor : A quantity which is a measure of 
the sharpness of resonance, or frequency 
selectivity, of a resonant oscillatory system having 
a single degree of freedom, either mechanical or 
electrical. 

NOTE — The quantity Q is equal to one-half the reciprocal of 
the damping ratio: 

1 



2c/c 



2.90 vibration generator; vibration machine : A 

machine that is specifically designed for and is 
capable of generating vibrations and of imparting 
these vibrations to other structures or devices. 

NOTE — Equipment to be tested may be attached to a table 
on the generator or the generator may be used to excite 
equipment by means of studs without the use of a table. 

2.91 vibration generator system : The vibration 
generator and associated equipment necessary for 
its operation. 

2.92 electrodynamlc vibration generator; 
electrodynamic vibration machine : A vibration 
generator which derives its vibratory force from the 
interaction of a magnetic field of constant value, 
and a coil of wire contained in it which is excited 
by a suitable alternating current. 

NOTE — The moving element of an electrodynamic vibration 
generator includes the vibration table, the moving coil, and 
all the parts of the generator that are intended to participate 
in the vibration. 

2.93 electromagnetic vibration generator : A 

vibration generator which derives its vibratory force 
from the interaction of electromagnets and magnetic 
materials. 

2.94 mechanical direct-drive vibration 
generator; direct-drive vibration generator : A 

vibration machine in which the vibration table is 
forced, by a positive linkage, to undergo a 



14 



displacement amplitude of vibration that remains 
essentially constant regardless of the load or 
frequency of operation. 

2.95 hydraulic vibration generator : A vibration 
generator which derives its vibratory force from the 
application of a liquid pressure through a suitable 
drive arrangement. 

2.96 mechanical reaction type vibration 
generator; unbalanced mass vibration 
generator : A vibration machine in which the forces 
exciting the vibration are generated by rotating or 
reciprocating unbalanced masses. 

2.97 resonance vibration generator : A vibration 
generator which contains a vibration system which 
is excited at its resonance frequency. 

2.98 piezoelectric vibration generator : A 

vibration generator which has a piezoelectric 
transducer as its force-generating element. 

2.99 magnetostrictlve vibration generator : A 

vibration generator which has a magnetostrictlve 
transducer as its force-generating element. 

2.100 deadweight; pure mass; lumped mass : 

A mass having the characteristics of a perfectly 
rigid mass over the frequency region of concern. 

2.1 01 cycle (verb) : A device is said to be cycled 
if it is operated repetitively through a range of a 
controlled variable such as frequency. [See cycle 
(noun) (2.22).] 

2.102 cycle period : The time required to cycle a 
device through all the controlled variables in the 
control range. 

2.103 cycle range : Cycle range is defined by the 
minimum and maximum values of the controlled 
variable, such as frequency, between which the 
device is cycled. 

2.104 sweep (as applied to the operation of a 
vibration generator) : The process of traversing 
continuously through a range of values of an 
independent variable, usually frequency 

2.105 sweep rate : The rate of change of the 
independent variable, usually frequency, for 
example dfldt where/ is frequency and / is time. 

2.106 uniform sweep rate; linear sweep rate : A 

sweep rate for which the rate of change of the 
Independent variable for a sweep, usually 
frequency, is constant, i.e. dfldt = constant. [See 
siveep/afe(2.105).] 

2.107 logarithmic frequency sweep rate : A 

sweep rate for which the rate of change of 
frequency per unit of frequency is constant, i.e. 



1811717:2000 
180 2041:1990 

{dflj)ldt = constant. [See sweep rate (2.1 05).] 

NOTES 

1 For a logarithmic sweep rate, the time to sweep between 
any two frequencies of fixed ratio is constant. 

2 It Is recommended that logarithmic sweep rate be 
expressed in octaves per minute. 

2.108 cross-over frequency (In vibration 
environmental testing) : That frequency at which a 
characteristic of a vibration changes from one 
relationship to another. 

NOTE — For example, a cross-over frequency may be that 
frequency at which the vibration amplitude, or r.m.s. value, 
changes from a constant displacement value versus 
frequency to a constant acceleration value versus 
frequency. 

2.109 isolator : A support, usually resilient, the 
function of which is to attenuate the transmission 
of shock and/or vibration. 

NOTE — An isolator may Include collapsible parts, servo- 
mechanisms or other devices in lieu of, or in addition to, the 
resilient member. 

2.1 10 vibration isolator : An isolator designed to 
attenuate the transmission of vibration in a 
frequency range. 

2.111 shocic isolator : An isolator designed to 
protect a system from a range of shock motions or 
forces. 

2.112 centre-of -gravity mounting system : A 

centre-of-gravity mounting system exists if, when 
the mounted equipment is displaced by translation 
from its neutral position, there is no resultant 
nrK)ment about any axis through the centre of mass. 

NOTE — In an ideal case, if an equipment is supported by a 
cenlre-of-gravity mounting system, then all natural (rigid- 
body) modes of vibration of the equipment on its mounts are 
decoupled. Translational motions of excitation will not excite 
rotational modes of vibration and vice versa. In practice, this 
is very difficult to achieve. 

2.113 shock absorber : A device for the 
dissipation of energy in order to reduce the response 
of a mechanical system to applied shock. 

2.114 damper; absorber : In vibration 
applications, a device used for reducing the 
magnitude of a shock or vibration by energy 
dissipation methods. 

2.115 snubber : A device used to restrict the 
relative displacement of a mechanical system by 
increasing the stiffness of an elastic element in 
the system (usually abruptly and by a large factor) 
whenever the displacement becomes larger than a 
specified amount. 



15 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

2.116 dynamic vibration absorber : a device 
for reducing vibrations of a primary system over a 
desired frequency range by the transfer of energy 
to an auxiliary system in resonance so tuned tiiat 
the force exerted by the auxiliary system is 
opposite in phase to the force acting on the primary 
system. 

NOTE — Dynamic vibration absorbers nnay be damped or 
undamped, but damping is not the primary purpose. 

2.117 detuner : An auxiliary vibratory system with 
an amplitude-dependent frequency characteristic 
which modifies the vibration characteristics of the 
main system to which it is attached. 

NOTE — An example is an auxiliary mass controlled by a 

non-linear spring. 

3 Mechanical shock 

3.1 mechanical shock; shock : A sudden change 
of force, position, velocity or acceleration that 
excites transient disturbances in a system. 

NOTE — The change Is normally considered sudden If It 
takes place in a time that Is short compared with the 
fundamental periods of concern. 

3.2 shock pulse : A form of shock excitation 
characterized by a sudden rise and/or sudden decay 
of a time-dependent parameter (such as motion, 
force or velocity). 

NOTE — A descriptive mechanical term should be used, for 
example acceleration shock pulse. 

3.3 applied shock; shock excitation : An 

excitation, applied to a system, that produces a 
mechanical shock. 

3.4 shock motion : A transient motion causing, 
or resulting from a shock excitation. 

3.5 impact : A single collision of one mass with a 
second mass. 

3.6 impulse : 

(1) The integral with respect to time of a force 
taken over the time during which the force is 
applied. 

(2) For a constant force, the product of the force 
and the time during which the force is applied. 

NOTE — In shock usage, the timeinterval Is relatively short. 

3.7 bump : A form of shock which is repeated 
many times for test purposes. 

3.8 ideal shock pulse : A shock pulse that is 
described by a simple time function, for example 
those cfef ined in 3.9 to 3. 1 5. 



3.9 half-sine shock pulse : An ideal shock pulse 
for which the time-history curve has the shape of 
the positive (or negative) section of one cycle of a 
sine wave. 

3.10 final peak sawtooth shock pulse; terminal 
peak sawtooth shock pulse : An ideal shock pulse 
for which the time-history curve has a triangular 
shape for which the motion increases linearly to a 
maximum value and then drops instantaneously 
to zero. 

3.1 1 initial peak sawtooth shock pulse : An kjeal 
shock pulse for which the motion rises 
instantaneously to a maximum value, after which 
it decreases linearly to zero. 

3.12 symmetrical triangular shock pulse : An 

ideal shock pulse for which the time-history curve 
has the shape of an isosceles triangle. 

3.13 versine shock pulse; haverslne shock 
pulse : An ideal shock pulse for which the time- 
history curve has the shape of one full cycle of a 
versine curve beginning at zero (sine-squared 
curve). 

3.14 rectangular shock pulse : An ideal shock 
pulse for which the motion rises instantaneously 
to a given value, remains constant for the duration 
of the pulse, then instantaneously drops to zero. 

3.15 trapezoidal shock pulse : An ideal shock 
pulse for which the motion rises linearly to a given 
value, which then remains constant for a period of 
time after which it decreases tb zero in a linear 
manner. 

3.16 nominal shock pulse; nominal pulse: A 

specified shock pulse that is given with specified 
tolerances. 

NOTES 

1 "Nominal shock pulse" Is a generic term. It requires an 
additional modifier to make Its meaning specific, for example 
nominal half-sine shock pulse, or nominal sawtooth shock 
pulse. 

2 The tolerances of the nominal pulse from the Ideal may be 
expressed In terms of pulse shapes (Including area), or 
corresponding spectra. 

3.17 nominal value of a shock pulse : A specified 
value (for example peak value or duration) given 
with specified tolerances. 

3.18 duration of shock pulse : The time-interval 

between the instant the motion rises above some 
stated fraction of the maximum value and the 
instant it decays to this fraction. 



16 



IS 11717: 
ISO 2041 



2000 
:1990 



NOTES 

1 This definition is limited to pulses of simple shape. 

2 For measured pulses, the "stated fraction" is usually taken 
as 1/10. For ideal pulses, it is taken as zero. 

3.19 rise time; pulse rise time : The interval of 
time required for the value of the pulse to rise from 
some specified small fraction of the maximum 
value to some specified large fraction of the 
maximum value. 

NOTE — For measured pulses, the "specified small fraction" 
is usually taken as 1/10 and the "specified large fraction" as 
9/1 0. For ideal pulses, the fractions are taken as and 1 ,0. 

3.20 pulse drop-off time; pulse decay time: 

The interval of time required for the value of the 
pulse to drop from some specified large fraction 
of the maximum value to some specified small 
fraction of the maximum value. 

NOTE — See the note to 3.1 9. 

3.21 blast; air blast; underwater blast : The 

pressure pulse and associated air or water motion 
resulting from an explosion or other sudden change 
of pressure in the atmosphere or water. 

3.22 shock wave : A shock time history 
(displacement pressure or other variable) 
associated with the propagation of the shock 
through a medium or structure. 

NOTE — In liquids and gases, a shock wave is usually 
characterized by a wave front in which the pressure rises 
suddenly to a relatively large value. 

3.23 shock testing machine; shock machine : 

A device for subjecting a system to controlled and 
reproducible mechanical shock. 

ci.24 shock response spectrum : 

(1 ) The description of the responses to an applied 
shock of a series of systems of a specified type 
as a function of their natural frequencies. 

(2) As used in the field of mechanical shock, an 
expression that approximates the maximum 
responses (displacement, velocity or acceleration) 
to an applied shock of an assembly of linear single 
degree-of-freedom systems, as a function of their 
natural frequencies. 

NOTES 

1 "Shock response spectrum" is a generic term. It requires 
an additional modifier to make its measuring specific, for 
example acceleration or velocity or displacement shock 
response spectrum. 

2 If the amount and type of damping of the systems are not 
given, they are assumed to be zero. Unless othenvlse 
indicated, the responses are maximum absolute values 
irrespective of sign and the time at which the maximum 



occurs. This is often referred to as maximax shock response 
spectrum. If reference Is made to other types of shock 
response spectra, this shall be stated. 

3 It should be noted that the concept of a shock response 
specturm is not fully consistent with the definition of spectrum 
(see 1.56). 

4 Transducers for shock and vibration 
measurement 

4.1 transducer : A device designed to receive 
energy from one system and supply energy of 
either the same or of a different kind, to another in 
such a manner that the desired characteristics of 
the input energy appear at the output. 

4.2 electromechanical pick-up : A transducer 
which is actuated by energy from a mechanical 
system (strain, force, motion, etc), and supplies 
energy to an electrical system, or vice versa. 

NOTE —The principal types of transducers used in vibration 
and shock are 

a) piezoelectric accelerometer; 

b) piezoresistive accelerometer; 

c) strain-gauge type accelerometer; 

d) variable-resistance transducer; 

e) electrostatic (capacitor) (condenser) transducer; 

f) bonded-wire (foil) strain-gauge; 

g) variable-reluctance transducer; 
h) magnetostriction transducer; 

i) moving-conductor transducer; 

j) moving-coil transducer; 

k) induction transducer; 

I) electronic transducer. 

4.3 seismic piclc-up : A transducer consisting of 
a seismrc system in which the differential movement 
between the mass and the base of the system 
produces an electrical output. 

NOTE — Acceleration pick-ups operate in a frequency 
range below the significant natural frequency of the seismic 
system. Velocity and displacement pick-ups operate in a 
frequency range above the natural frequency of the 
seismic system. 

4.4 linear transducer : A transducer for which 
the output quantity andthe input quantity are linearly 
related within a specified frequency and amplitude 
range. 

4.5 unilateral transducer : A transducer that 
cannot be actuated by signals at its outputs in such 
a manner as to supply related signals at its inputs. 



17 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

4.6 bilateral transducer : A transducer capable 
of transmi^ion in either direction between its 
terminations. 

NOTE — A bilateral transducer usually satisfies the principle 
of reciprocity. 

4.7 sensing element : Tliat part of a transducer 
that is activated by the input excitation and supplies 

the output signal. 

4.8 rectilinear transducer : A transducer designed 
to be sensitive to some characteristic of a 
translational motion. 

NOTE — The modifier "rectilinear" is used only when it Is 
necessary to distinguish this type of transducer from those 
sensitive to rotational motions. 

4.9 angular transducer : A transducer designed 
to measure some characteristic of rotational 
motion. 

4.10 accelerometer; acceleration pick-up : A 

pick-up which converts an input acceleration to an 
output (usually electrical) that is proportional to the 

input acceleration. 

4.1 1 velocity pick-up : A pick-up that converts 
an input velocity to an output (usually electrical) 
that is proportional to the input velocity 

4.12 displacement pick-up : A pick-up that 
converts an input displacement to an output 
(usually electrical) that is proportional to the input 
displacement. 

4.13 vibrograph : An instrument, usually self- 
contained and mechanical in operation, that can 
present an oscillographic recording of a vibration 

waveform. 

4.14 vibrometer : An instrument capable of 
indicating on a scale some measure of the 
magnitude of a vibration, such as peak velocity 
r.m.s. acceleration, etc. 

4.1 5 sensitivity (of a transducer) : The ratio of a 
specified output quantity to a specified input 
quantity 

NOTE —The sensitivity of a transducer is usually determined 
for sinusoidal excitation. 

4.16 calibration factor (of a transducer) : The 
average sensitivity within a specified frequency 
range. [See sensitivity (4.15).] 

4.17 sensitive axis (of a rectilinear transducer) : 
The nominal direction for which a rectilinear 
transducer has the greatest sensitivity 

4.18 transverse axis (of a transducer) : Any 
nominal direction perpendicular to the sensitive 
axis. 



4.19 transverse sensitivity (of a rectilinear 
transducer); cross-sensitivity : The sensitivity of 
a transducer to excitation in a nominal direction 
perpendicular to its sensitive axis. 

NOTE — The transverse sensitivity is usually a function of 
the nominal direction of the axis chosen. 

4.20 transverse sensitivity ratio (of a rectilinear 
transducer); cross-sensitivity ratio : The ratio of 
the transverse sensitivity of a transducer to its 
sensitivity along its sensitive axis. 

4.21 transducer phase shift : The phase angle 
between the transducer output and input for 
sinusoidal excitation. 

4.22 transducer distortion : Distortion which 
occurs when the output of the transducer is not 
proportional of the input. 

4.23 amplitude distortion (of a transducer) : 
Distortion occurring when the ratio of the output of 
a transducer to its input at a given frequency varies 
with the input amplitude. 

4.24 frequency distortion; frequency response : 

Distortion or response occurring within a given 
frequency range when the amplitude sensitivity of 
the transducer for a given amplitude of excitation 
is not constant over that range. 

4.25 phase distortion : Distortion occurring when 
the phase angle between the output of a transducer 
and its input is not a linear function of frequency. 

5 Data processing 

5.1 power spectral density; auto-spectral 
density; auto spectrum : The power spectral 
density G (/) of a quantity ^ (t) is the mean-square 
value of that part of the quantity passed by a narrow- 
band fitter of centre frequency/, per unit bandwidth, 
in the limit as the bandwidth approaches zero and 
the averaging time approaches infinity 

^40TES 

1 Power spectral density can be expressed as 



G{f): 



llm 
B- 



1 r 2 

>0 







where 



^{fj,B)\s the result of passing I (/) through a narrow- 
band-pass filter of bandwidth B centred at/ and then 
squaring the output; 

T is the averaging time. 



18 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 : 1990 



in terms of Fourier transforms, G (/") can be expressed as equatbn: 



G(/)=lim 2 


F(/,T) 


/^O; 


F(f,T) = j'^^(t)e-'''^ 


•di 



where 





2 Power spectral density is a generic term used regardless 
of the physical process represented by the time-history. 
The physical process involved is indicated in referring to 
particular data. 

For example, the term acceleration power spectral 
density or acceleration spectral density is used instead 
of power spectral density when the acceleration spectrum 
is to be described. 

3 For stationary processes, the power spectral density is 
twice the Fourier transform [see Fourier spectrum (A.21 )] of 
the autocorrelation function, and may be expressed as 



G{f) = 2r R(t)e-'^''^'dt 

—00 

= 4l^R{t)oos{2nft)6i{f^0) 

5.2 power spectrum : A spectrum of mean- 
squared spectral density values. 

5.3 cross-spectral density; cross-spectrum : 

Complex valued function of frequency/ of two 
quantities ^^ (/) and ^^ {t) defined by 



Gi,2(/-) = Ci,2(/')-iei.2(/") 



where 



the real part Ci, 2 (/*), called the coincident 
spectral density function (or co-spectrum), is 
the average product of 4^ {t) and ^2 (0 ^^ 
frequency / per unit bandwidth, for an 
appropriate bandwidth B and averaging time 
r. The real part, Ci, 2 (/)» is thus given by the 
following equation : 



1 



;T 



Ci. 2 (/) = lim btI' ^i(/; t, B) #2{/; ^ B) dt 




B- 
T- 



where 



4^ (/; t, B) and ^2 iff t, B) are the results of 
passing ^^ and ^2 W. respectively, through 
identical narrow-band-pass filters of bandwidth 
iB centred at/; 

the imaginary part Q^2 (/). called the quadrature 
spectral density function (or quad-spectrum), is also 
an average product of ^^ (/) and ^2 (0 ^^ frequency 
/per unit bandwidth, except that ^2 (0 is shifted in 
phase to produce a 90^^ phase lag. The imaginary 
part, Qi, 2 (/). is thus given by the following 



ei.2(/) = lim— jf^i(/;/,5)^^(/;/,B)d/ 

BT 
B^O 

r->oo 
where 

|i (/; /, B) is the result of passing ^1 (/) through 
a narrow-band-pass filter of bandwidth B centred 
at/ 

4l{f,t,B) denotes a 90° phase lag from ^2 if, t, 
B) which is the result of passing ^2 (0 through 
a narrow-band-pass filter of bandwidth B centred 
at/ 

NOTES 

1 For the definitions of the function G (/), see the notes 
under power spectral density (5.1 ). 

2 The functions Ci, 2 (/) and gi, 2 (/) can ben expressed in 
temns of Fourier transforms as follows : 

Ci,2(/)=limy RelF]if,nF2if,T)] 
7'->oo 

ei.2(/') = lim J lm[F\{f,nF2{f,T)] 

where 
/>0; 

/^*(/:r)=J^^i(/)e*2''/'ci/; 


/^(;:r) = J^^2(/)e-*2''^d/; 


Re[...] and Im [...] are the real and imaginary parts, 
respectively, of the function in the brackets. 

3 In terms of finite Fourier transforms, Gi, 2(f) can be 
expressed as 

Gi.2(/) = lim Y in{f,T)F2{f2T)] 

4 In terms of the Fourier transform of the cross-correlation 
function (/?i, 2), Gi, 2 {/) can be expressed as 

Gi.2(/)=2 |-^'^/?i.2(/)e-^2.y>d/ 

—00 

5.4 coherence function : The ratb of the square 
of the absolute value of the cross-spectral density 
function to the product of the spectral density 
functions of the two quantities 4^{t) and ^2 (0* 

The coherence function is given by the following 
expression : 



y?.2(/) = 



\Gun\ 



G^U)•G2(f) 

At any frequency/ the coherence function satisfies 

0^r?.2(/)^1- 



19 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

NOTE — For definitions of the terms G^ , 2 (/), Gi (/) and G2 
(/), see the notes under power spectral density (5.1) and 
cross-spectral density (5.3). 

5.5 statistical degrees of freedom :The nunnber 
of independent variables in an estimate of some 

quantity. 

NOTES 

1 The number of degrees of freedom determines the 
statistical accuracy of an estimate. 

2 When time-averaging is used in the analysis of random 
data, the effective number of statistical degrees of freedom 
is « = 2BT, where B is the effective filter bandwidth and T\s 
the effective averaging time. 

5.6 equivalent (static) acceleration (for a single 
degree-of -freedom system) : For a dynamic 
excitatbn, the steadily applied acceleration required 
to produce the same maximum relative 
displacement as the excitation does. 

5.7 pseudovelocity : The product of the maximum 
relative displacement of an undamped single 
degree-of -freedom system and the angular natural 

frequency 27t/n. 

5.8 aliasing error : An erroneous result in digital 
analysis of signals caused by having the maximum 
frequency of the signal greater than one-half the 
value of the sampling frequency (see 5.15) 
(which is sometimes referred to as the "Shannon 
frequency"). 

5.9 data block : The ordered collection of data 
points stored in the memory of a digital computer. 

5.10 block size; block length : The number of 
records, words or characters in a block. 

5.11 data points : The digital values obtained as 
a result of converting an analog signal. 

5.12 frequency resolution : The reciprocal of the 
totaltime(see5.13). 

5.13 total time (in data processing) : The time 
needed to fill a data block. 

5.14 sampling; sample (verb) : To obtain the 
values of a function for regularly or irregularly 
spaced distinct values from its domain. 

NOTE — Other meanings of this term may be used in 
particular fields, for example in statistics. 

5.15 sampling frequency : The number of 
samples taken in one second. 

5.16 sampling interval :Thetime interval between 
two samples. 

5.17 smoothing : An averaging process in which 
a data block is shifted and averaged. 



NOTE — For example, smoothing over three data points is 
characterized by the relationship 

Smoothing can be done in the time domain, the frequency 
domain and in histograms. 

5.18 truncation (in vibration analysis) : The 
application of a record length which is too short to 
define the signal accurately. 

5.19 data processing : A general term for the 
electronic or mechanical processing of original 
information. 

5.20 data handling : Data processing which 
introduces no change in the original information, 
for example card sorting tabulation, storage, 
retrieval, coordinate transformation, etc. 

5.21 data reduction : Data processing which 
causes changes in the original information, for 
example conversion from analogue to digital or vice 
versa, inversion of a function, averaging, etc. 

5.22 real-time analysis : Signal processing to 
analyse parameters in real time. 

5.23 Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) : A process 
where the computing Jimes of complex 
multiplications/additions are greatly reduced. 

5.24 quantizing : An analog-to-digital conversion 
where sampling quantizes every data point. 

5.25 window function : A truncated function that 
is used for reducing the errors in processing 
weighted data points. 

5.26 daterministic vibration : A vibration the 
instantaneous value of which at a certain time can 
be predicted from knowledge of its time history at 
an earlier time. 

NOTE — In mathematical terms, if/(/) for / >/ocan be 
predicted f rom/(/ ) for / < /o, then the vibration represented 
by/(/) is deterministic. 

5.27 time history : The magnitude of a quantity 
expressed as a function of time. 

5.28 stationary process : An ensemble of time 
histories such that their statistical properties are 
invariant with respect to translations in time. 

5.29 strongly self-stationary : Term used to 
describe a random signal if all statistical properties 
determined by averaging a sample over a finite 
time interval are independent of the time at which 
the sample occurs. 

5.30 weakly self-stationary : Term used to 
describe a random signal if the mean value and 
autocorrelation function determined by averaging 



20 



a sample over a fin' te time interval is independent 
of the time at whic the sample occurs. 



5.31 ergodic p 

containing an ens 
averages are \h 



cess : A stationary process 
ible of time histories where time 
me for every time-history. 



NOTE — If follows these time averages from any time 
history will then b qual to corresponding statistical 
averages over the en:, imble. 

5.32 random process; stochastic process : A 

set (ensemble) of time functions that can be 
characterized through statistical properties. 

5.33 ensemble; set : A collection of signals. 

5.34 autocorrelation function : For a quantity 
x{t), the mean of the product of the value of the 
quantity at time / with its value at time (/ + z). 

NOTES 

1 The autocorrelation function can be expressed 
mathematically as 

/?W = W/)][:c (/ + !)] =4" l^x{()x{t + x)6t 

2 For a stationary random quantity x{t) which persists for 
all time, r approaches infinity, that is 



R(x) = m ±-J^jc(/)jc(/ + x)d/ 



T 

.4 



In practice, ris finite and the formula given in note 1 only 
gives an estimate with a certain statistical uncertainty 
which increases as /"decreases. 

5.35 cross-correlation function : For two 

quantities x{t) andy (/ ), the mean of the product of 
the value of one function at a time f and the value 
of the other function at a time (/ + t). 

NOTES 

1 The cross-correlation function can be expressed 
mathematically as 

R^,yM = [jc(/)][y(/ + T)] = 4- r x{i)yU+x) dt. 
^ 

2 See note 2 under autocorrelation function (5.34). 



1811717:2000 
180 2041:1990 

5.36 autocorrelation coefficient : For a quantity 
x{t), the ratio of the autocorrelation function to the 
mean-square value of the quantity. 

NOTE — The autocorrelation coefficient can be expressed 
mathematically as 

R{x) lx{t)]lx{t + t)] 



^(x) = 



mo) 



^ 



5.37 cross-correlation coefficient : For two 

quantities x{t) and y (/). the ratio of the cross- 
coH'elatbn function to the square root of the product 
of the mean-square values of the quantities. 

fgOTE — This can be expressed mathematically as 



^(X): 



^x.yi^) 



,IRx{0)R^O) 



where 

Rx,y(t) is as defined in 6.35. 

At any delay x, the cross-correlation coefficient 
satisfies 

-1<^x.>(t)^1 

5.38 effective bandwtdtli (of a specified band- 
pass filter) : The bandwidth of an ideal filter which 
has flat response in its passband and transmits 
the same power as the specified filter when the 
two filters receive the same white-noise input signal. 

NOTE — The effective bandwidth may be measured by 
dividing the mean-square response of the filter to white- 
noise excitation by the product of the excitation ^ectral 
density and the square of the maximum transmission. 

5.39 effective averaging time : The time required 
for an ideal integrator to yield the same parameter 
estimate as the averaging device employed. 

5.40 confidence interval : For a normal 
distribution of measured data points, the range 
within which one value will lie with a given degree 
of probability 



21 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 



Annex A 

(informative) 

Mathematical terms^) 



A.I reference : A quantity associated with a point 
in an element or system from which, or with respect 
to which, other similar quantities are measured. If 
the same reference is used generally throughout a 
system, it is called a common reference. 

A.2 variable : A quantity that can assume a (finite 
or infinite) succession of values. 

A.3 independent variable : A variable, such as 
time, the value of which is not determined by other 
variables. 

A.4 dependent variable : A variable the values 
of which are determined by values of independent 
variables and parameters. 

A.5 parameter : In a mathematical relationship, a 
quantity that describes a system characteristic. A 
parameter may be a variable in an equation, or it 
may be a "constant" that can be assigned different 

values. 

A.6 function : The expression of a relationship 
between one dependent variable (the value of the 
function) and one or more independent variables 
and constants. For example a function of y, z 
andr. 

A.7 proportional : One variable is said to be 
directly proportional to another variable if the ratio 
of the corresponding values of the variables is 
constant, and inversely proportional to another 
variable if the ratio of the reciprocal of one variable 
to the corresponding value of the other variable is 
constant. 

A.8 linear function : One variable is said to be a 
linear function of another variable if changes in the 
first variable are directly proportional to changes 
in the second variable. 

A.9 generalized coordinates : Quantities 
independent of one another, and necessary and 
sufficient for describing the configuration of a 
system. 

A.10 vector : A quantity that is completely 
determined by its magnitude and direction. 

A. 11 scalar : Any quantity that is completely 
determined by its magnitude. 

A.12 imaginary number : The product of a real 



number andV - 1 . The V -^ is normally 
represented by j or i. 

NOTES 

1 The positive value of the square root Is implied. 

2 In the vector, or geometric, Interpretation, the multiplication 
of any complex number by I rotates It 90** counterclockwise 
about the origin, and multiplying It by - i rotates it 90° clockwise 
about the origin. 

A.13 complex number : 

(1) A number that contains both a real and an 
imaginary part. 

(2) A number which represents a vector from the 
origin in a two-dimensional coordinate system. 

NOTE — If a complex number is given asz-x + \y, where the 
Imaginary part is given as I/, then x and y represent the 
component parts of the vector along the two orthogonal x 
and \y axes. The magnitude of the vector (or absolute 
value of the complex number) is Z = (jr^ + y^)^'^ ^p^j xhe 
direction of the vector (or the argument of the complex 
number) Is <P= arc tany/r.The complex number can also be 
expressed as 

z = Z(cos <P+lsln 0) = Ze'* 

A.1 4 phasor : A complex number the magnitude 
of which is the amplitude of the oscillation and the 
angle of which is the phase. For example, if it is 
desired to express a harmonic oscillation 
Y (t) = Yo cos( eat + <?> ) In complex notation, it 
would be expressed as follows: 



y(0 = Re(yie''^) 



where 



Y^ is a complex quantity called the phasor, the 
magnitude of which equals Yo and the angle 
(or argument) of which is the phase angle (^); 

Re means "real part of", but this is usually 
omitted as understood. 

Y^ is expressed as 

Yo<0 

or 

IqCOS 0+ \YoS\t\ 

where i = ^JI^. 

Y^ may also be written Y^ = Yo e'*. 



1) The definitions Included In this annex are essential to those working in the field of vibration and shock. However, as the 
formulations are also the concern of others, these definitions are not considered part of this International Standard. 



22 



A,15 argument (of a complex number) : The angle 
that fixes the direction of the complex number 
(vector). [See the note under complex number 
(A.13).] 

A.16 modulus (of a complex number) : The 
absolute value of the complex number. [See the 
note under complex number {AA3).] 

A.17 absolute value 

(1 ) Of a real number, a positive number that has 
the same numerical value as a real number which 
may be of either sign. 

(2) Of a complex number, the positive square root 
of the sum of the squares of the real and imaginary 
parts. [Seethe note under complex number {AA3).] 

A.18 Fourier series : A series which expresses 
the values of a periodic function in terms of discrete 
frequency components that are harmonically 
related to each other. 

NOTES 

1 A non-periodic function can be represented by a Fourier 
series if the interval over whicli the function is defined is 
taken as the fundamental period of the series. 

2 A Fourier expansion of /(/) into a Fourier series is given 
by 

00 

/(/) = ao+ zL (an COS noit + bn s\n ntot) 

n = 1 

A Fourier expansion of/(/) into a complex Fourier series is 
given as 

f{t)= L c^e^'^ 

where 

a„ and b„ are Fourier coefficients; 

c„ is a complex Fourier coefficient; 

CO is the angular frequency and is equal to 2n/z, where 
t is the fundamental period; 

n is assigned only integral values. 

The values of the Fourier coefficient are 

«o = -Lj^/(/)d/ 







On 



= — { /(/)coswarfd/(« = 1,2, 3....,) 







bn=~ r/(/)sinwGrfd/(w==1,2, 3 ) 

^ 



cn = -i f V(0 e'^'^ d/ (w = ±1 , ±2, ±3,....) 
^ 
It can be shown that 

^n - '^ ^ ^ , ^n - "'^n 
c+„ = co=ao C-„~ 

2 2 



1811717:2000 
180 2041:1990 

The amplitude of each Fourier discrete frequency is 
j~2 2" 

The Fourier phase angle is 

<Ai = arctan ( bL\ 

A.19 Fourier coefficients : The coefficients of 
the discrete harmonic components of a Fourier 
series. [ See note 2 under Fourier series (A.1 8). ] 

A.ZO Fourier transform; Fourier integral 
equation: 

(1) Direct Fourier transform : The transformation 
of a non-periodic function of time (or other variable 
such as distance) into a continuous function of 
frequency (or other variable such as wave number). 

(2) Inverse Fourier transform : The transformation 
of a continuous function of frequency (or other 
variable such as wave number) into its 
corresponding function of time (or other variable 
such as distance). 

NOTE — lf/(/) is a non-periodic function of time, the complex 
form of the direct Fourier transform equation is: 



F(a>)= J f(t)B' 

■'-00 



d/ 



The time function /(/) is obtained from F(fi)) by the following 
integration (the inverse Fourier transform equation): 

1 +00 

/(0=^Loo^He'"'dG, 

(The use of the factor 1 /2n represents one formulation 
of the pair of transforms. In other formulations M2n 
appears in the direct rather than the inverse transform, 
or lV27t may appear in each.) 

Since F (w) is in general in complex form, it can be 
written in terms of a real and an imaginary part: 

F {o}) = Re[F (co)] + i Im [F(o})] 

where 

r+QO 

RefKtt))] = f f(t) cos otdt 
Im[F ((»)]= f°^/(/)sinftrfd/ 

-00 

Alternatively, the Fourier spectrum can be defined in 
terms of its absolute value and phase angle, \f{(o}\ 
and <P(<u), respectively: 



F(fi?)= \f(w)\ e'^ 



where 



\f((d)\= iJHe^[F{6})] + Im^[F(©)] 
. Im[F(a))] y 

0im) = arctan < „ , ,, > 
I Re[F(fi>)] J 

A.21 Fourier spectrum : A descriptbn of Fourier 
amplitudes as a function of frequency. 

NOTE — Two Fourier spectra are required to define a 



23 



IS 11717: 
ISO 2041 



2000 
:1990 



function. These can either be spectra of the Amplitudes of 
the real and imaginary parts of a Fourier spectrum or they 
can be a spectrum of the absolute amplitude values and a 
spectrum of the fourier phase angles. [See note 2 under 
Fourier series (A. 18) and the note under Fourier transform 
(A.20).] 

A.22 Fourier phase spectrum; phase spectrum : 

The description of Fourier phase angle as a function 
of frequency [See note 2 under Fourier series 
(A.1 8) and the note under Fourier transform (A.20).] 

A.23 line spectrum : A spectrum the components 
of which occur at one or more discrete frequencies. 

A.24 continuous spectrum : A spectrum the 
components of which are continuously distributed 
over a frequency range. 

A.25 orthogonal functions : A set of functions, 
0ri (x), defined in an interval < x <X, is orthogonal 
in the interval if 



f 0„0*mdbc^O, \oxn^m 



where 



0m* is the complex conjugate of 0„,. 

A.26 deterministic function : A function the value 
of which can be predicted from knowledge of its 
behaviour at previous times. 

A.27 superposition principle : A principle which 
states that the responses of a system to different 
excitations are additive. The superposition principle 
is valid only for linear systems. 

A.28 process : A collection of signals. The term 
"process" rather than the term "ensemble" ordinarily 
is used when it is desired to emphasize the 
properties the signals have or do not have as a 
group. Thus, one speaks of a stationary process 
rather than of a stationary ensemble. 

A.29 probability : An expression of the likelihood 
of occurrence of an event. The probability of 
occurrence of a particular event is generally 
estimated as the ratio of the number of occurrences 
of the particular event to the total number of 
occurrences of all types of events considered. 

For a stationary random vibration, the probability 
that the magnitude will be within a given magnitude 
range is taken to be equal to the ratio of the time 
that the vibration is within that range to the total 
time of observation. 

NOTES 

1 It is required that a large number of events or a long 
observation time be involved in the probability determinations. 

2 A unit probability means that the occurrence of a particular 
event is certain. Zero probability means that It will not occur. 



3 The probability that the magnitude of a vibration will be 
within a given range is equal to the integral of the probability 
density function of that vibration integrated over the given 
range. [See probability density (A.30).] 

A.30 probability density : As applied to vibration 
theory, at a specified vibration magnitude, the ratio 
of the probability that the vibration magnitude will 
be within a given incremental range, to the size of 
the incremental range, as the increment size 
approaches zero. 

NOTES 

1 The probability density can be expressed 
mathematically as 



p(x„}~ llm 



or 



p{x)^ 



dPjx) 
djc 



where 

p(xm) is the probability density at Xm] 

Axrrt is an Incremental range of magnitude beginning 
at a magnitude jcmi 

p(Ax,n) is the probability that the vibration magnitude 
will have a value between jc^ and x^ + A;c„ . 

2 The probability density /?(jt) is the derivative of the 
cumulative probability distribution function, P(x), with 
respect to jc. (SeeA.34). 

A.31 probability density function; probability 
density distribution curve . The probability 
density function, for vibration theory, is an 
expression of the probability density associated 
with a stated vibration. 

The probability density distribution curve is a 
graphical representation of the probability density 
function. 

NOTES 

1 The functions p(x} given under probability density (A.30) 
nonnal distribution (A.32) and Rayleigh distribution (A.33) 
are probability density functions. 

2 The total area under the probability density curve is equal 
to unity. 

A.32 normal distribution; Gaussian 
distribution; normal probability density 
distribution : A normal, or Gaussian, distribution 
has a probability density function equal to 



P{Xp) = 



1 



where 



y^f2% 



e -:^/(2a2) 



CT is the r.m.s. value of, for instance, vibration 
magnitude [see star)dard deviation (A.37).] 

Xp is the instantaneous vibration magnitude. 



24 



The mean value of the vibration is assumed to be 
zero. 

A. 33 Rayleigh distribution : A Rayleigh 
distribution has a probability density function equal 
to 

a 
where 

a is the r.m.s. value; 

Xp is the magnitude of positive maxima. 

The maxima (peak values) of a narrow-band 
Gaussian random vibration have a Rayleigh 
distribution. 

A. 34 cumulative probability distribution 
function; probability distribution function :The 
cumulative probability distribution function, P(x), 
represents the probability that the magnitude of 
the variable jc (magnitude of the random vibration) 
will not be exceeded. It is the probability that the 
value of the variable x will be less than a specified 
value, X. 

NOTE — The cumulative probability distribution function is 
equal to 



PW= 1^ p(u)6u 



where m is a dummy variable of integration for jc, 
A.35 mean value; arithmetic mean : 

(1 ) Of a number of discrete quantities, the algebraic 
sum of the quantities divided by the number of 
quantities. 

NOTE — The mean value, x, is given by 

where ^ 

jc„ \s the value of the nth quantity; 
N is the total number of discrete quantities. 

(2) Of a function, x(t), over an interval between /i 
and /2, the mean value, T, is given by 



F= ^ 

t2-h 

A.36 geometric mean (of two quantities) : The 
square root of the product of two quantities. 

A.37 root-mean-square value; r.m.s. value : 

(1) Of a set of numbers, the square root of the 
average of their squared values. 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

NOTE — The r.m.s, value of a set of numbers can be 
represented as 



r.m.s. value = 



N 



V2 



where the subscript n refers to the «th number of which 
there are a total of N. 

(2) Of a single-valued function,/(/), over an interval 
between h and /2» the square root of the average 
of the squared values of the function over the 
interval. 

NOTES 



1 The r.m.s. value of a single-valued function,/(/), over an 
interval between /i and tz is 

Y2 

r.m.s. value = 






/2 -/1 J 

2 In vibration theory, the mean value of the vibration is equal 
to zero. In this case, the r.m.s. value is equal to the standard 
deviation, and the mean-square value is equal to the variance 
(o^). [See standard deviation (A.3Q) and vanance (A.39).] 

A,38 standard deviation ; The root-mean-square 
(r.m.s.) value of the deviation of a function (or a 
set of numbers) from a mean value. 

NOTES 

1 The symlx)! a is commonly used to represent the standard 
deviation. 



2 For a set of numbers, the standard deviation Is 

V2 

n 



N 



where 

the subscript n refers to the wth number; 

A^ is the total number of numbers in the set; 

J is the mean value of the set. [See mean value {A.35).] 

3 If jc is a single-valued function of t, its standard deviation 
over an inten/al between u and tz is 



1/2 



f^2 

(x-x^dt 



4 In vibration theory, If the mean value, x , is taken to be 
zero, then the standard deviation Is equal to the r.m.s. value. 

A.39 variance : The square of the standard 
deviation. 

NOTE — In vibration theory, where the mean value is zero 
the variance is the mean-square value of a variable 
representing the magnitude of a vibration. [See note 3 under 
mean-square value {A.40).] 



25 



1511717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

A.40 mean-square value : The mean-square value 
of a function (or set of numbers) over an interval is 
equal to the mean of the squared values of the 
function (or set of numbers) over that interval. 

NOTES 

1 The mean-square value is the square of the r.m.s. value. 

2 In vibration theory, when the mean value is zero, the 
mean-square value is the variance. [See variance (A, 39).]. 



If the mean value is not zero, then 

where 

y/^ Is the mean-square value; 

cr^ is the variance; 

7 Is the mean value. 



Annex B 

(informative) 

Auxiliary terminology^) 



B.1 signal : 

(1 ) A disturbance variation of a physical quantity 
used to convey information. 

(2) The information to be conveyed over a 
communication system. 

B.2 distortion (of a signal) : An undesired change 
in the waveform. 

NOTE — For an acceleration, for example, the distortion, 
d, is usually expressed In percentage terms as 



i' 



2 . 2 

tot^^l 



x100 



where 



'1 



^1 



is the r.m.s. value of the acceleration at 
the driving frequency; 



atot is the total r.m.s. value of the acceleration 
applied (Including the value of a^). 

B.3 resolution : The resolution of a system for 
measuhng motions is the smallest change in input 
(dispalcement, velocity, acceleration, strain, or 
other input quantity) for which a change in output 
is discernible. 

B.4 time constant; relaxation time : The time 
taken by an exponentially decaying quantity to 
decrease in magnitude by a factor of 1/e = 
0,367 9, 

NOTE — The discharge of an electrical capacitance through 
a resistance is proportional to 

0-//RC 



where 

/ Is time; 

R is resistance in ohms; 

C Is capacitance In farads; 

e is the base of natural logarithms; 

and the product, RC, Is the time constartt or 
relaxation time. 

B.5 ground; earth : 

(1 ) The conducting mass of the Earth, or a conductor 
connected to it through a very small impedance. 

(2) A conductor that is considered to have zero 
electrical potential. The electrical potential of 
the Earth is usually taken to be zero. 

B.6 ground wire; earth wire : A wire connected 
to a ground terminal. 

B.7 ground loop; earth loop : The closed elec- 
trical circuit formed by the connection of a ground 
wire to several ground terminals at different 
locations. 

B.8 input impedance (of an electronic 
amplifier) : The electrical impedance between 
the input terminals. 

NOTE — The input impedance may be affected by the 
output load; if so, the output load should be specified. 

B.9 output impedance (of an electronic 
amplifier) :The electrical impedance between its 
output terminals. 



1 ) The definitions included in this annex are essential to those working in the field of vibration and shock. However, as the 
formulations are also the concern of others, these definitions are not considered part of this International Standard. 

26 



NOTE — The output impedance may be affected by the 
source impedance at the input; if so, the source impedance 
should be specified. 

B.10 operational amplifier: An amplifier which 

includes a feedback loop which maintains a specific 
relationship between the output terminals and 
the input terminals. 

NOTE •— Depending upon the type of feedback and other 
auxiliary circuitry, the amplifier can be used to perform 
various functions, such as integration, differentiation, 
charge amplification, etc. 

B.11 charge amplifier : An amplifier which 
presents an output that is proportional to the 
total electrical charge presented to the input. 

B.12 cross-talk : The signal observed in one 
channel due to a signal in another channel. 

B.13 frequency response .The output signal 
expressed as a function of the frequency of the 
input signal. The frequency response is usually 
given graphically by curves showing the 
relationship of the output signal and, where 
applicable, phase shift or phase angle as a f unctbn 
of frequency 

B.14 filter; wave filter : A device for separating 
oscillations on the basis of their frequency It 
introduces relatively small attenuation to wave 
oscillations in one or more frequency bands and 
relatively large attenuation to oscillations of other 
frequencies. 

NOTE — Electrical filters, and some mechanical filters 
employing resonances, may amplify selective frequency 
bands and thus provide filter action. ' 

B.15 pass band (of a band-pass filter) : The 
frequency band between the upper and lower cut- 
off frequencies. 

B.16 low-pass filter : A filter which has a single 
transmission band extending from zero frequency 
up to a finite frequency. 

B.17 high-pass filter : A filter which has a 
single transmission band extending from some 
critical or cut-off frequency not zero, up to infinite 
frequency or, in practice, above the highest 
frequency of interest. 

B.18 band-pass filter : A filter which has a 
single transmission band extending from a lower 
cut-off frequency greater than zero to a finite 
upper cut-off frequency. 

B.19 nominal bandwidth (of a filter); bandwidth : 
The difference between the nominal upper and 
lower cut-off frequencies. This difference can be 
expressed 



1811717:2000 
180 2041:1990 

a) in hertz; 

b) as a percentage of the pass-band centre 
frequency; or 

c) as the interval between the upper and lower 
nominal cut-offs in octaves. 

B.20 nominal upper and lower cut-off 
frequencies (of a filter pass-band); cut-off 
frequency : Those frequencies above and below 
the frequency of maximum response of a filter 
at which the response to a sinusoidal signal is 
3 dB below the maximum response. 

B.21 constant-bandwidth filter : A filter which 
has a bandwidth of constant value when expressed 
in hertz. It is independent of the value of the 
centre frequency of the filter. 

B.22 proportional-bandwidth filter : A filter 
which has a bandwidth that is proportional to 
the centre frequency 

NOTE — Octave bandwidth, one-third octave bandwidth, 
etc, are typical bandwidths for proportional-bandwidth filters. 

B.23 octave : The interval between two 
frequencies which have a frequency ratio of two. 

NOTE — The interval, in octaves, between any two 
frequencies is the logarithm to the base 2 {or 3.322 times 
the logarithm to the base 10) of the frequency ratio. 

B.24 one-half octave; half octave : The interval 
between two frequencies which have a frequency 
ratio of 2^'^, or 1 ,41 4. [See the note under octave 
(8.23).] 

B.25 one-third octave; third octave: The interval 

between two frequencies which have a frequency 
ratio of 2^^, or 1 ,259 9. [See thetiotCunder octave 
(B.23).] 

NOTE — For certain kinds of acoustical measurements it 
is convenient to space the frequencies in fractions of an 
octave, but for extensions into the infrasonlc and ultrasonic 
ranges it is convenient to use powers of 10. These two 
conflicting requirements can be satisfied adequately for 
most purposes because 2^^ = 1,259 9 is very nearly 
equal to 10^'^°= 1,258 9. the discrepancy being less than 
0,1 %. This means that ten successive intervals of 1/3 
octave are very nearly equivalent to a ratio of 1 in frequency. 

B.26 one-tenth decade : The interval between 
two frequencies which have a frequency ratio of 
10^/^0or1,258 9. 

NOTES 

1 The difference between 1/10 decade and 1/3 octave is 
less than 0,1 % [see ttj^ note under one-third octave 
(B.25).] The two bandwidths can therefore be considered 
equivalent for practical purposes. 

2 The inten/al, in decades, between any two frequencies 
is the logarithm to the base 1 of the frequency ratio. 



27 



1811717:2000 
ISO 2041 :1990 

B.27 octave-bandwidth filter : A band-pass 
filter for which the pass-band is one octave, i.e. 
the difference between the upper and lower cut- 
off frequencies is one octave. [See proportional- 
bandwidth filter {B. 22).] 

B.28 one-third-octave filter; third-octave 
filter : A band-pass filter for which the difference 
between the upper and lower cut-off frequencies 
is one-third octave. [See proportional-bandwidth 
filter {B.22) and the note under one-third octave 
(B.25).] 

B.29 narrow-band filter : A band-pass filter for 
which the pass-band width is relatively narrow. 

NOTE — Whether or not a bandwidth can be considered 
narrow is dependent upon the circumstances. For shock 
and vibration work, it is normally 1/3 octaves or less. 

B.30 wide-band filter : A band-pass filter for 
which the pass-band is relatively wide. 

NOTE — Whether or not a bandwidth can be considered 
wide is dependent upon the circumstances. For shock 
and vibration work, it is normally greater than one octave. 

B.31 centre frequency; nominal pass-band 
centre frequency : The geometric mean of the 
nominal cut-off frequencies of a pass-band. 

NOTE — The geometric mean is equal to y[fj^ , where/i 
and/2 are the cut-off frequencies, 

B.32 band-elimination fitter; band-reject 
filter: A filter that provides a large attenuation 
for one frequency band, and little loss for 
frequencies outside of this band. 



B.33 tracking filter : A band-pass filter (usually 
narrow-band) the centre frequency of which can 
be made to follow a quasi-sinusoid of varying 
frequency. 

B.34 crystal filter : A narrow-band fitter for which 
the piezoelectric crystal operating at a resonance 
frequency is the principal element of the filter. 

8.35 magnetostrictlve filter : A narrow-band 
filter for which a magnetostrictlve element at a 
resonance frequency is the principal element of 
the filter. 

B.36 peak-notch filter : An electrical filter which 
is adjusted so as to change the signal applied 
to a power amplifier driving an electrodynamic 
vibration generator, such that it will eliminate relative 
maxima and minima which appear in the spectrum 
of the generator output. 

NOTE — The relative maxima and minima in the spectrum 
are usually caused by the mechanical reactions of 
mechanical elastic systems that are subjected to the 
vibration. 

B.37 equalization (of an electrodynamic vibratbn 
generator system) : The adjustment of the gain 
of the electrical amplifier and control system so 
that the ratio of the output vibration amplitude 
to the input signal amplitude is of constant value 
(or given values), throughout the required 
frequency spectrum. 



28 



IS 11717: 
180 2041 



2000 
11990 



Annex C 

(informative) 

Schema for arranging vibration terms 



The terms in this vibratton terminology are arranged 
in accordance with the logic shown in figure C.1 . It 
is based on practical rather than theoretical 
considerations, on the manner in which records of 
vibrations (time histories) are collected and how 
the information extracted from these records is 
treated. The two principal categories of vibrations 
are based on whether a particular vibration is 
deterministic or random. 



Deterministic vibration is the class of vibrations 
for which the instantaneous value of the vibration 
at a specified time is determined precisely by its 
^ime history (i.e. the record of its instantaneous 
values) for time values earlier (i.e. less) than the 
specified time. Random vibration is the class of 
vibrations for which the instantaneous value of the 
vibration at a specified time cannot be determined 
by its time history. 



Vibrations 



Deterministic 



Random 



















Periodic 




Non-periodic 
























Sinusoidal 


Multi-sinusoidal 




Transient 



Stationary ergodic 



Non-stationary 



Strongly 
self-stationary 



Weakly 
self-stationary 



Figure C.1 — Schema for types of vibration 



29 



IS 11717:2000 
ISO 2041 : 1990 



Alphabetical index 



absolute value A. 17 

absorber 2.114 

absorber, dynamic vibration 2.116 

absorber, shock 2.113 

accelerance (see table 1) 

acceleration 1 .03 

acceleration, equivalent (static) .... 5.6 
acceleration power spectral 

density , see 5.1) 

acceleration spectral density .... 'see 5.1) 

acceleration of gravity 1 .04 

acceleration pick-up 4.10 

accelerometer 4.10 

acoustic noise (see 2.6) 

acoustics 1.10 

air blast 3.21 

aliasing error 5.8 

ambient vibration 2.19 

amplitude 2.33 

amplitude distortion 4.23 

amplitude, double (see 2.33) 

amplitude, peak (see 2.33) 

amplitude, single (see 2.33) 

amplitude, vector (see 2.33) 

angle difference, phase 2.32 

angle, phase 2.31 

angular frequency 2.30 

angular transducer 4.9 

antinode 2.47 

antiresonance 2.74 

antiresonance frequency 2.75 

aperiodic motion 2.21 

apparent mass 1 .55 

applied shock 3.3 

argument A. 15 

arithmetic mean A. 35 

audio frequency 2.67 

autocorrelation coefficient 5.36 

autocorrelation function 5.34 

auto-spectral density 5.1 

auto-spectrum 5.1 

axis, sensitive 4.17 

axis, transverse 4.18 

B 

band-elimination filter B.32 

band-pass filter B.18 

band-reject filter B.32 

bandwidth (of a filter) B.19 

bandwidth, effective 5.38 

bandwidth, nominal B.19 

beat frequency 2.29 

beats 2.28 

bel 1.58 

bilateral transducer 4.6 

blast 3.21 

block size 5.10 

block length 5.10 

blocked effective mass (see table 1 ) 

blocked impedance 1 .47 

broad-band random vibration .... 2.12 

bump 3.7 



calibration factor 4.16 

central principal axes (see 1 .32) 

central principal moments of 

inertia (see 1 .32) 

centre frequency B.31 

centre of gravity 1 .30 

centre-of-gravity mounting system . 2.1 12 

centre of mass 1 ,31 

characteristic mode (see 2.55) 

charge amplifier B.11 

circular frequency 2.30 

circular vibration 2.45 

coefficient, autocorrelation 5.36 

coefficient, cross-correlation 5.37 

coefficient, linear viscous damping . 2.84 

coefficient, viscous damping 2.84 

coefficients, Fourier A. 19 

coherence function 5.4 

common reference (see A.I) 

complex excitation 1 .38 

complex Fourier coefficient .... (see A. 18) 

complex number A. 13 

complex response 1 .39 

complex system parameter 1 .40 

complex vibration (see 1 .38) 

complex waveform (see 1 .38) 

compliance 1 .34 

compressional wave 2.59 

conditioning 1,15 

confidence interval 5.40 

constant-bandwidth filter B.21 

continuous spectrum A.24 

continuous system 1 .29 

coupled modes 2.53 

crest factor 2.37 

critical damping 2.85 

critical damping, fraction of 2.86 

critical speed 2.77 

critical viscous damping 2.85 

cross-correlation coefficient 5.37 

cross-correlation function 5.35 

cross-over frequency 2.108 

cross-sensitivity 4,19 

cross-sensitivity ratio 4.20 

cross-spectral density 5.3 

cross-spectrum 5.3 

cross-talk B.12 

crystal filter B.34 

cumulative probability distribution 

function A. 34 

cut-off frequency B.20 

cycle (noun) 2.22 

cycle (verb) 2.101 

cycle period 2.102 

cycle range 2.103 

cyclic frequency 2.24 

D 

damped natural frequency 2.81 

damper 2.114 

damping 2.79 

damping coefficient, linear viscous . 2.84 



damping coefficient, viscous 2.84 

damping, critical 2.85 

damping, critical viscous 2.85 

damping, equivalent viscous 2.83 

damping, fraction of critical 2.86 

damping, linear viscous 2.82 

damping, non-linear 2.88 

damping ratio 2.86 

damping, viscous 2.82 

data block 5.9 

data handling 5,20 

data points 5.11 

data processing 5.19 

data reduction 5.21 

deadweight 2.100 

decibel 1,59 

decrement, logarithmic 2.87 

degrees of freedom 1 .26 

degrees of freedom, statistical 5.5 

dependent variable A. 4 

deterministic function A. 26 

deterministic vibration 5.26 

detuner 2.117 

difference, phase angle 2.32 

direct-drive vibration generator .... 2.94 

Direct Fourier transform A. 20 

direct impedance 1 .43 

direct (mechanical) mobility 1.51 

directly proportional (see A. 7) 

displacement 1.1 

displacement pick-up 4.12 

distortion B.2 

distortion, amplitude 4.23 

distortion, frequency 4.24 

distortion, phase 4.25 

distortion, transducer 4.22 

distributed system 1 .29 

dominant frequency 2.13 

double amplitude (see 2.33) 

driving-point impedance 1 .43 

driving-point (mechanical) mobility . 1 .51 

duration of shock pulse 3.18 

dynamic compliance (see table 1 ) 

dynamic elastic constant 1 .54 

dynamic spring constant 1 .54 

dynamic stiffness 1 .54 

dynamic vibration absorber 2.116 



earth B.5 

earth loop B.7 

earth wire B.6 

echo 2.71 

effective averaging time 5.39 

effective bandwidth 5.38 

effective load (see 1 .55) 

effective mass 1 .55 

effective weight (see 1 .55) 

eigen mode (see 2.55) 

electrical noise (see 2.6) 

electrodynamic vibration generator. 2.92 
electrodynamic vibration machine. . 2.92 
electromagnetic vibration generator 2.93 



30 



IS 11717:2000 
ISO 2041 : 1990 



electromechanical pick-up 4.2 

elliptical vibration 2.43 

ensemble 5.33 

environment 1.11 

equalization fof an electrodynamic 

vibration generator system) B.37 

equivalent (static) acceleration 5.6 

equivalent system 1 .25 

equivalent viscous damping 2.83 

ergodic process 5.31 

excitation 1.16 

excitation, complex 1 .38 

excitation, shock 3.3 

excursion 2.36 

excursion, total 2.36 

extraneous vibration 2.20 

F 

factor, calibration > . 4.16 

factor, crest 2.37 

factor, form 2.38 

Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) 5,23 

filter B.14 

filter, band-elimination B.32 

filter, band-pass 8.18 

filter, band-reject 8.32 

filter, constant-bandwidth 8.21 

filter, crystal 8.34 

filter, high-pass 8.17 

filter, low-pass 8.16 

filter, magnetostrictive B.35 

filter, narrow-band 8.29 

filter, octave-bandwidth 8.27 

filter, one-third-octave 8.28 

filter, peak-notch 8.36 

filter, proportional-bandwidth B.22 

filter, third-octave 8.28 

filter, tracking 8.33 

filter, wave 8.14 

filter, wide-band 8.30 

final peak sawtooth shock pulse . . . 3.10 

fixed-base natural frequency 2.76 

forced oscillation 2.16 

forced vibration 2.16 

form factor 2.38 

foundation 1 .23 

Fourier coefficients A. 19 

Fourier integral equation A.20 

Fourier phase spectrum A.22 

Fourier series A.18 

Fourier spectrum A.21 

Fourier transform A.20 

fraction of critical damping 2.86 

free impedance 1 .45 

free oscillation 2.17 

free vibration 2.17 

frequency 2.24 

frequency-averaged mobility 

magnitude 1 .52 

frequency, angular 2.30 

frequency, antiresonance 2.75 

frequency, audio 2.67 

frequency, beat 2.29 

frequency, centre 8.31 

frequency, circular 2.30 

frequency, cross-over 2.108 

frequency, cut-off 8.20 

frequency, (cyclic) 2.24 

frequency, damped natural 2.81 

frequency distortion 4.24 



frequency, dominant 2.13 

frequency, fixed-base natural 2.76 

frequency, fundamental 2.25 

frequency, infrasonic 2.69 

frequency, nominal lower 8.20 

frequency, nominal pass-band 

centre 8.31 

frequency, nominal upper 8.20 

frequency range of interest 1 .49 

frequency, resolution 5.12 

frequency resonance 2.73 

frequency response 4.24; 8.13 

frequency-response function 1 .48 

frequency, sampling 5.15 

frequency, ultrasonic 2.68 

frequency, undamped natural 2.80 

function A.6 

function, cumulative probability 

distribution A.34 

function, autocorrelation 5.34 

function, coherence 5.4 

function, cross-correlation 5.35 

function, frequency-response 1.48 

function, deterministic A.26 

function, linear. A.8 

function, probability density A.31 

function, probability distribution . . . A.34 

function, window 5.25 

functions, orthogonal A.25 

fundamental, frequency 2.25 

fundamental natural mode of 

vibration 2.50 

fundamental period 2.23 



Gaussian distribution A.32 

Gaussian random noise 2.8 

generalized coordinates A.9 

geometric mean A.36 

gravity, acceleration of 1 .4 

ground ^ 8.5 

ground loop 8.7 

ground wire B.6 



H 



half octave 8.24 

half-sine shock pulse 3.9 

hamnonic 2.26 

haversine shock pulse 3.13 

hertz , (see 2.24) 

high-pass filter 8.17 

hydraulic vibration generator 2.95 



I 



ideal shock pulse 3.8 

imaginary number A.12 

impact 3.5 

impedance 1 .41 

impedance, blocked 1 .47 

impedance, direct 1 .43 

impedance, driving-point 1 .43 

impedance, free 1 .45 

impedance, incremental (see 1.41) 

impedance, input 8.8 

impedance, loaded 1 .46 

impedance, mechanical 1 .42 

31 



impedance, output B.9 

impedance, transfer 1 .44 

impulse 3.6 

incremental impedance (see 1 .41 ) 

independent variable A.3 

induced environment 1.12 

inertia force 1 .7 

inertial force 1 .7 

inertial reference frame 1 .6 

inertial reference system 1 .6 

infrasonic 2.69 

infrasonic frequency 2.69 

initial peak sawtooth shock pulse .. 3.11 

input impedance B.8 

instantaneous value 2.39 

Inverse Fourier transform A.20 

inversely proportional (see A.7) 

isolator 2.109 

isolator, shock 2.1 11 

isolator, vibration 2.110 



jerk 



1.5 



level 1 .57 

line spectrum A.23 

linear function A.8 

linear sweep rate 2.106 

linear system 1 .21 

linear transducer 4.4 

linear vibration 2.44 

linear viscous damping 2.82 

linear viscous danriplng coefficient . 2.84 

loaded impedance 1 .46 

logarithmic decrement 2.87 

logarithmic frequency sweep rate . . 2.107 

longitudinal wave 2.60 

loop 2.47 

low-pass filter 8.16 

lumped mass 2.100 



M 

machine, electrodynamic vibration . 2.32 

rnachine, vibration 2.90 

magnetostrictive filter 8 .35 

magnetostrictive vibration 

generator 2.99 

magnitude, peak 2.34 

mass, apparent 1 .55 

mass, effective 1 .55 

mass, lumped 2.100 

nnass, pure 2.100 

maximax 2.41 

maximum value 2.40 

mean, arithmetic A.35 

mean, geometric A.36 

mean-square value A.40 

mean value A.35 

mechanical admittance (see table 1 ) 

mechanical direct-drive vibration 

generator 2.94 

mechanical impedance 1 .42 

mechanical mobility 1 .50 

mechanical reaction type vibration 

generator 2.96 



IS 11717:2000 
ISO 2041 : 1990 



mechanical shock 3.1 

mechanical system 1 .22 

mobility, (mechanical) 1.50 

mobility, direct (mechanical) 1.51 

mobility, driving-point (mechanical) 1 .51 
mobility magnitude, frequency- 
averaged 1.52 

mobility, mechanical 1 .50 

mobility, transfer (mechanical) 1.53 

modal numbers 2.52 

mode, characteristic (see 2.55) 

mode, eigen (see 2.55) 

mode, natural (see 2.55) 

mode, normal 2.55 

mode of vibration 2,48 

mode of vibration, natural 2.49 

mode of vibration, fundamental 

natural 2.50 

mode, shape 2.51 

modes, coupled 2.53 

modes, uncoupled 2.54 

modulus A. 16 

motion, aperiodic 2.21 

motion, shock 3.4 

moving element (see 2.92) 

multi-degree-of-freedom system ... 1.28 
multi-sinusoidal vibration (see 2.3) 



N 



narrow-band filter B.29 

narrow-band random vibration .... 2.11 

natural environment 1.13 

natural frequency, damped 2.81 

natural frequency, fixed-base 2.76 

natural frequency, undamped 2.80 

natural mode (see 2.55) 

natural mode of vibration 2.49 

natural mode of vibration, 

fundamental 2.50 

negative peak value 2.34 

neutral axis 1 .36 

neutral surface 1 .35 

node 2.46 

noise 2.6 

noise, acoustic (see 2.6) 

noise, electrical (see 2.6) 

noise, Gaussian random 2.8 

noise, pink 2.10 

noise, random 2.7 

noise, white 2.9 

nominal bandwidth B.19 

nominal lower cut-off frequency ... B.20 

nominal pass-band centre frequency 8.31 

nominal pulse 3.16 

nomina) shock pulse 3.16 

nominal upper cut-off frequency . . . B.20 

nominal value of a shock pulse 3.17 

non-linear damping 2.88 

non-stationary vibration 2.5, 5.32 

normal distribution A.32 

normal mode 2.55 

norma) probability density distribution A.32 

numbers, modal 2.52 



octave B.23 

octave-bandwidth filter B.27 

one-half octave B.24 



one-tenth decade B.26 

one-third octave B.25 

one-third-octave filter B.28 

operational amplifier 8. 10 

orthogonal functions A. 25 

oscillation 1 .8 

oscillation, forced 2.16 

oscillation, free 2.17 

output impedance B.9 

overshoot 1.19 

overtone (see 2.26) 



parameter A. 5 

pass-band B.15 

peak amplitude (see 2.33) 

peak magnitude 2.34 

peak-notch filter 8.36 

peak-to-peak value 2.35 

peak-to-r.m.s. ratio 2.37 

peak value 2.34 

peak value, negative 2.34 

peak value, positive 2,34 

period 2.23 

period, cycle 2.102 

period, fundamental 2.23 

periodic vibration 2,2 

periodic quantity (see 2.2) 

phase 2.31 

phase angle 2.31 

phase angle difference 2.32 

phase difference 2.32 

phase distortion 4.25 

phase shift, transducer 4.21 

phase spectrum A.22 

phasor A. 14 

pick-up, acceleration 4.10 

pick-up, displacement 4.12 

pick-up, electromechanical 4.2 

pick-up, seismic 4.3 

pick-up, velocity 4.11 

piezoelectric vibration generator ... 2.98 

pink noise 2.10 

pink random vibration 2.10 

plane wave 2.64 

positive peak value 2.34 

power spectral density 5.1 

power spectrum 5.2 

preconditioning 1.14 

principal axes of inertia 1 .32 

principal moments of inertia (see 1 .32) 

probability A.29 

probability density A.30 

probability density distribution curve A. 31 
probability density distribution, 

norma! A.32 

probabiUty density function A.31 

probability distribution function A. 34 

probability distribution function, 

cumulative A. 34 

process A.28 

process, ergodic 5.31 

process, random 5.32 

process, stationary 5.28 

process, stochastic 5.32 

proportional A. 7 

proportional-bandwidth filter B.22 

pseudovelocity 5.7 

pulse decay time 3,20 

pulse drop-off time 3.20 

pulse, duration of shock 3.18 

32 



pulse, final peak sawtooth shock ... 3.10 

pulse, half-sine shock 3.9 

pulse, haversine shock 3.13 

pulse, ideal shock 3.8 

pulse, initial peak sawtooth shock . . 3.1 1 

pulse, nominal 3.16 

pulse, nominal shock 3.16 

pulse, nominal value of a shock 3.17 

pulse, rectangular shock 3. 14 

pulse rise time 3.19 

pulse, shock 3.2 

pulse, symmetrical triangular shock 3.12 
pulse, terminal peak sawtooth 

shock 3.10 

pulse, trapezoidal shock 3.15 

pulse, versine shock 3.13 

pure mass 2.100 



Q; Q factor 2.89 

quantizing 5.24 

quasi-periodic vibration {see 2.2) 

quasi-sinusoidal vibration (see 2.3) 



random noise 2.7 

random noise, Gaussian 2.8 

random process 5.32 

random vibration 2.4 

random vibration, broad-band 2.12 

random vibration, narrow-band . . . , 2.1 1 

random vibration, pink 2.10 

random vibration, white 2.9 

ratio, cross-sensitivity 4.20 

ratio, damping 2.86 

ratio, peak-to-r.m.s 2.37 

ratio, transverse sensitivy 4,20 

Rayleigh distribution A. 33 

real-time analysis 5.22 

receptance (see tabte 1) 

rectangular shock pulse 3.14 

rectilinear transducer 4.8 

rectilinear vibration 2.44 

reference A.I 

reference, common (see A. 1 ) 

relative displacement 1.1 

relative velocity ^.2 

relaxation time B.4 

resolution B.3 

resonance 2.72 

resonance frequency 2.73 

resonance response, subharmonic . 2.78 

resonance vibration generator 2.97 

response M7 

response, complex 1,39 

response, frequency 4,24 

response function, frequency 1 .48 

response spectrum, shock 3.24 

response, subharmonic 2.78 

response, subharmonic resonance . 2.78 

reverberation 2.70 

rise time 3.19 

rise time, pulse 3.19 

r.m.s. value A.37 

root-mean-square value A.37 



IS 11717:2000 
ISO 2041 : 1990 



sample (verb) 5.14 

sampling 5.14 

sampling frequency 5.15 

sampling interval 5.16 

scalar A.11 

seismic pick-up 4.3 

seismic system 1 .24 

self-excited vibration 2.18 

self-Induced vibration 2.18 

self-stationary, strongly 5.29 

self-stationary, weakly 5.30 

sensing element 4.7 

sensitive axis 4.17 

sensitivity 4.15 

sensitivity ratio, transverse 4.20 

sensitivity, transverse 4.19 

set 5.33 

severity, vibration 2.42 

shape, mode 2.51 

shear wave 2.61 

shock 3.1 

shock absorber 2.1 13 

shock, applied 3.3 

shock, excitation 3.3 

shock isolator 2. 1 1 1 

shock machine 3.23 

shock, mechanical 3.1 

shock motion 3.4 

shock pulse 3.2 

shock pulse, duration of 3.18 

shock pulse, final peak sawtooth ... 3.10 

shock pulslfhalf-sine 3.9 

shock pulse, haversine 3.13 

shock pulse, ideal 3.8 

shock pulse, initial peak sawtooth . . 3. 1 1 

shock pulse, nominal 3.16 

shockpulse, nominal value of a 3.17 

shock pulse, rectangular 3.14 

shock pulse, symmetrical triangular 3. 12 
shock pulse, terminal peak 

sawtooth 3.10 

shock pulse, trapezoidal 3.15 

shock pulse, versine 3.13 

shock response spectrum 3.24 

shock testing machine 3.23 

shock wave 3.22 

signal... B.l 

simple harmonic vibration 2,3 

single amplitude (see 2.33) 

single degree-of-freedom system . . 1 .27 

sinusoidal vibration 2.3 

smoothing 5.17 

snubber 2.115 

sound 1.9 

spectrum density, acceleration . . (see 5.1 ) 
spectrum density, acceleration 

power (see 5.1) 

spectral density, power 5.1 

spectrum 1 .56 

spectrum, continuous A.24 

spectrum, Fourier A.21 

spectrum, Fourier phase A.22 

spectrum, line A.23 

spectrum, phase A.22 

spectrum, power 5.2 

spectrum, shock response 3.24 

speed, critical 2.77 

spherical wave 2.65 

standard deviation A. 38 



standing wave 2.66 

stationary process 5.28 

statistical degrees of freedom 5.5 

steady-state vibration 2.14 

stiffness 1 .33 

stiffness, dynamic 1 .54 

stimulus 1.16 

stochastic process 5.32 

strongly self-stationary 5.29 

subharmonic 2.27 

subharmonic resonance response . . 2.78 

subharmonic response 2.78 

superposition principle A.27 

sweep 2.104 

sweep rate 2.105 

sweep rate, linear 2.106 

sweep rate, uniform 2.106 

sweep rate, logarithmic frequency , 2. 107 

symmetrical triangular shock pulse . 3. 12 

system l .20 

system, continuous 1 .29 

system, distributed 1 .29 

system, equivalent 1 .25 

system, linear 1 .21 

system, mechanical 1 .22 

system, multi-degree-of-freedom . . 1 .28 

system, seismic 1 .24 

system, single degree-of-freedom . . 1 .27 

system, vibration generator 2.91 

T 

terminal peak sawtooth shock pulse 3.10 

third octave B.25 

third-octave filter B.28 

time constant B.4 

time history 5.27 

total excursion 2.36 

total time (in data processing) 5.13 

tracking filter B.33 

transducer 4.1 

transducer, angular 4.9 

transducer, bilateral 4.6 

transducer distortion 4.22 

transducer, linear 4.4 

transducer, phase shift 4.21 

transducer, rectilinear 4.8 

transducer, unilateral 4.5 

transfer function 1 .37 

trb.isfer Impedance 1 .44 

transfer (mechanical) mobility 1.53 

transient vibration 2.15 

transmisslbillty 1 .18 

transverse axis 4.18 

transverse sensitivity 4. 19 

transverse sensitivity ratio 4.20 

transverse wave 2.62 

trapezoidal shock pulse 3.15 

truncation 5.I8 

u 

ultrasonic 2.68 

ultrasonic frequency 2.68 

unbalanced mass vibration generator 2.96 

uncoupled modes 2.54 

undamped natural frequency 2.80 

undershoot 1.19 

undenwater blast 3.21 

uniform sweep rate 2.106 

unilateral transducer 4.5 

33 



value 2.39 

value, absolute A.17 

value. Instantaneous 2.39 

value, maximum 2.40 

value, mean-square A.40 

value, peak 2.34 

value, peak-to-peak 2.35 

value, r.m.s A.37 

value, root-mean-square A.37 

variable A.2 

variable, dependent A.4 

variable, independent A.3 

variance A.39 

vector A. 10 

vector amplitude (see 2.33) 

velocity 1 .02 

velocity pick-up 4.1 1 

versine shock pulse 3.13 

vibration 2.1 

vibration absorber, dynamic 2.116 

vibration, ambient 2.19 

vibration, broad-band random 2.12 

vibration, circular 2.45 

vibration, deterministic 5.26 

vibration, elliptical 2.43 

vibration, extraneous 2.20 

vibration, forced 2.16 

vibration, free 2.17 

vibration, fundamental natural 

mode of 2.50 

vibration generator 2.90 

vibration generator, direct-drive . . . 2.94 

vibration generator, electrodynamic 2.92 
vibration generator, 

electromagnetic 2.93 

vibration generator, hydraulic 2.95 

vibration generator, 

magnetostrictlve 2.99 

vibration generator, mechanical 

direct-drive 2.94 

vibration generator, nr>echanical 

reaction type 2.96 

vibration generator, piezoelectric . . 2.98 

vibration generator, resonant 2.97 

vibration generator system 2.91 

vibration generator, unbalanced 

mass 2.96 

vibration Isolator 2.110 

vibration, linear 2.44 

vibration machine 2.90 

vibration machine, electrodynamic . 2.92 

vibration, mode of 2.48 

vibration, narrow-band random 2.11 

vibration, natural mode of 2.49 

vibration, non-stationary 2.5 

vibration, periodic 2.2 

vibration, f^nk random 2.10 

vibration, random 2.4 

vibration, rectilinear 2.44 

vibration, self-excited 2,18 

vibration, self-Induced 2.18 

vibration severity 2.42 

vibration, simple harmonic 2,3 

vibration, sinusoidal 2.3 

vibration, steady-state 2.14 

vibration, transient 2.15 

vibration, white random 2.9 

vlbrograph 4.13 

vibrometer 4.14 



IS 11717:2000 
ISO 2041 : 1990 

viscous damping 2.82 wave, compressional 2.59 w/ave, standing 2 66 



wave train 2.57 



VISCOUS damping coefficient 2.84 wave filter r ia 

viscous damping coefficient, linear . 2.84 ^ 

viscous damping, critical 2.85 wavefront 2.63 wave, transverse 2.62 

viscous damping, equivalent 2.83 wave, longitudinal 2.60 wavelength 2.58 

viscous damping, linear 2.82 wave, plane 2 64 weakly self-stationary 5.30 

white noise 2.9 

W wave,shear 2.61 white random vibration 2.9 

wave, shock 3.22 wide-band filter B.30 

^^^® 2.56 wave, spherical 2.65 window function 5.25 



34" 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

I, 
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BlS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No LM 04 ( 0390 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 1323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T, Scheme VII M, V. I, P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 1 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 1 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Prdss, Khuija, India 



