**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14240 (1995) : Orthopaedic implants - General 
requirements for marking packaging and labelling [MHD 2 : 
Orthopaedic Instruments, Implants and Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1814240:1995 
180 6018:1987 



nrdhWm (R-«lrm,d200,, 

Indian Standard 

ORTHOPAEDIC IMPLANTS — GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR MARKING, PACKAGING 

AND LABELLING 



UDC 616.46 



© BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1995 Price Group 1 



Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee, MHD 2 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 9714-1 : 1991 ^Orthopaedic drilling instruments — 
Part 1 Drill bits, taps and countersink cutters', issued by the International Organization for Stand- 
ardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the 
Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equip- 
ment and Hospital Planning Division Council. 

The text of above mentioned ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian 
Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard*. 

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice 
is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian 
Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place 
are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: 

International Corresponding Indian Degree of 

Standard Standard Equivalence 

ISO 5835 : 1991 IS 9829 (Part 1) : 1981 Metal bone screws : Technically 

Part 1 Screws with asymmetric thread, variable equivalent 

fitting (spherical) and IS 9829 (Part 2) : 1981 
Metal bone screws : Part 2 Screws with asym- 
metric thread, conical under surfaces 

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of ISO 7153-1 : 1983 referred in 
this' adopted standard and has decided that this is acceptable for use in conjunction with this 
standard. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values {revised)'. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



IS 14240:1995 
ISO eoia : 1987 



Indian Standard 

ORTHOPAEDIC IMPLANTS — GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR MARKING, PACKAGING 

AND LABELLING 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies general requirements for 
the marking, packaging and labelling of orthopaedic implants 
supplied either sterile or as manufactured, i.e. prior to steril- 
ization. 

NOTE — The requirements of an International Standard for a particular 
implant take precedence over the requirements of this International 
Standard. 



2 Reference 

ISO 2014, Wr/tmg of calendar dates in all-numeric form. 



3.8 inner container: The packaging that is in direct contact 
.with the Implant. 

3.9 outer container: The packaging that envelops the inner 
container such that sterility and the integrity of the contents are 
maintained. 



4 Identification marking of orthopaedic 
implants 

4.1 General 

Each implant shall be identified by means of the information 
listed in 4.2 and in accordance with the requirements specified 
in 4.3. 



3 Definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the following 
definitions apply. 



3.1 sterile: In microbiology, free from all living organisnns; in 
practice, the condition of a product that has been subjected to 
a validated sterilization process and maintained in this state by 
suitable protection. 



3.2 sterilized: Term used to denote an object that has been 
subjected to a validated sterilization process. 

3.3 unit: Individual device(s) or objectis) defined in the rele- 
vant product standard or regulation. 

3.4 kit : A number of components to be used for a single pur- 
pose on the same occasion. 

3.5 unit pack: A pack containing a single unit or kit. 



4.2 Marking 

The identification marking of the implant shall comprise the 
following information (see, however, 4.3.2): 

a) the name or trade-mark of the manufacturer or supplier; 

b) the designation of the material, comprising either the 
full reference of the relevant International Standard(s) (if 
available) for the material, or the relevant symbol; 

NOTES 

T If a relevant International Standard is not available, ar\ 
equivalent national standard may be used. 

2 The following symbols have been agreed for use in conjunction 
with metallic materials: 

S — stainless steel; 

T — titanium and its alloys; 

C — cobalt-t>ased alloys. 

c) the manufacturer's traceability code for the implant; 

d) the designated size and type, if applicable. 



3.6 multiple pack: A pack containing a number of unit 
packs. 



3.7 sterile pack : A pack intended to maintain the sterility of 
the contents and comprising an inner and outer container. 



4.3 Application of marking 

4.3.1 If not excluded by the relevant International Standard(s) 
for a particular implant, implants shall be marked with the infor- 
mation listed in 4.2 in characters not less than 1 mm high (see, 
however, 4.3.2). 



IS 14240: 
ISO 6018 



1995 
1987 



4.3.2 Implants having insufficient space to accommodate all 
the information listed in 4.2 a) to d) shall be marked with the in- 
formation required by as many of items a) to d) as possible. 

NOTE — The method and site of marking should not deleteriousiy 
affect the satisfactory functioning of the implant. 



5 General requirements for packaging 

5.1 Each implant should be supplied clean and, with the ex- 
ception of small implants, shall be packaged in a unit pack that 
will protect the implant from mechanical damage. All points or 
sharp edges shall be suitably protected by packaging to prevent 
damage to the implant or to the pack. 

NOTE — Packaged implants may be supplied either in the sterile condi- 
tion, in which case they are labelled as such [see item e) in clause 61, or 
in the non-sterile condition. 



5.2 If two or more implants are packaged as a kit in the same 
unit pack, each implant shall be separated from the others by 
suitable material. 



5.3 In cases where a number of unit packs are contained in a 
multiple pack, the multiple pack shall protect the contents 
during transit and storage. 



5.4 Each pack shall be capable of being opened easily by 
hand, and such that sterile products shall be capable of being 
presented sterile and ready for use. The outer container shall be 
designed so that once opened it should not be possible to 
reseal ; however, if it is possible to reseal the outer container, it 
shall be clearly visible that the outer container has been opened 
and resealed. 



6 Labelling 

The following information, if applicable, shall appear legibly on 
or in each pack : 

a) the narne or registered trade-mark and address of the 
manufacturer; 

bl the batch or lot number, related to records of raw 
materials, manufacture, packaging and sterilization; 

c) a description of the contents, including name, size and 
material(s) ; 

d) an Indication as to whether the implant is for single use; 

e) the words "STERILE UNLESS PACKAGE DAMAGED" 
or equivalent wording and an indication of the sterilization 
process used shall appear on the label of packaged parts 
which have been sterilized by a recognized process; 

NOTE — Attention is drawn to the existence in some countries of 
national regulations regarding the identification of sterile implants. 

f) if the implant is not to be re-sterilized, it shall be clearly 
indicated ; 

g) the recommended method of opening the sterile pack 
to ensure sterile presentation at the time of use; 

h) if storage and transportation conditions are pertinent, 
these should be clearly indicated; 

i) expiry date {year and month) or date of manufacture, 
expressed in accordance with ISO 2014. 

NOTE — If sterilization is the last stage of manufacture, the date of 
sterilization should be recorded on the pack. 



7 Product information 

For non-sterile implants and for sterile implants if re-sterilization 
is permitted, accompanying literature describing sterilization/ 
re-sterilization procedures shall be included in the pack. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution establishe4 under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 
of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by 
referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook* and 'Standards Monthly Additions*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MHD 2 ( 2611 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDLAN STAJ^DARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002. 

Eastern : 1/14 C I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A^ CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



Telephone 



{ 



331 01 31 
331 13 75 



r 378499,378561 
\ 378626,378662 

{ 



603843 
602025 



r 235 02 16, 235 04 42 
\ 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

/ 632 92 95, 632 78 58 
1.6327891,6327892 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Reprography Unit, HIS, New Delhi, India 



