***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 10974-4 (1984) : Code for hygienic conditions for 
production transport, storage and distribution of 
indigenous milk products. Part 4: Frozen products, KULFI 
[FAD 15: Food Hygiene, Safety Management and Other Systems] 



^^^^^r 



C^IJIi^^=JCsS^ff71l^vS^3g^TN:^a^ITFSggg 



5?5im |7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 



^ 



ik 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS r 10374 ( Part 4 ) - 1304 

(Reaffirmed 2012) 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PAflT 4 FROZEN PRODUCTS KVLFI 



UDC 637-1 /'J : 663674U043/-4 : 613-6 




(£} Copyright 1984 

INDIAN SfANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR. SHAH ZAifAR MARG 

NRW DELHI IlOOUj 

*jj X December (984 



!S : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1^84 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 4 FROZEN PRODUCTS Kum 



tiJifi^^SiiiiuH* 



Pood Hygiene Sectional Oommittee, AFDC 36 

Chairtnatt Representing^ 

Dft A. N. Rai ChowdhurV National Institute of Communicabte Diseases 

( DGHS ). New Delhi 

Members 

Agricultural MarkeI-ing AdViSeR Dirtctotate of Marlceting and Iiisp«ctiofl 
TO THE Government of India ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad 

Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alt'tAate ) 
DrN. p. Bhalla Indian Veterinary Research Institute (ICAR), 

Izatnagar 

Dr S. B. kuLSMRESttTIlA ( AheTtitite ) 

Shri D. S. Chadha Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Dr ( ShrimatI ) Indira Chakraborty All India institute of Hygiene & Public 

H«alth, Calcutta 
. Shri Om P. D^amija Export Inspection Council of India, New 

Delhi 
Shri C. T. Dwarkanath Central Food Technological Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 
ExECUtiVE Health Officer Municipal Corporation of Greatet Bombay, 

Bombay 
Municipal Analyst ( AUemate ) 
Col O. p. Kapoor Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Shri Tmiru S. ^asturi Government Analyst to the Government o' 

Tamil Nadu, Madras 
Shri Sw J. Kekobad Cadbury India Ltd, Bombay 

Maj-Gen kp^SvAL Krishna Directorate General Armed Forces Medical 

S'Crvices, New Delhi 
Col N. L. SachdeVa ( Alterftat6 ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected Under the Indhn Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of tfee 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright undert the said Act. 



•dkm^BUtfiaa 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr ( Shrimati ) R. Sankaran 



Representing 



Defence Food Research Laboratory, Ministry 
of Defence (R&D), Mysore 
Dr ( Shrimati ) D. Vijaya Rao ( Alternate ) 



Dr N. K. Sen 
Shri G. D. Sharma 

Dr B. K. Nandi ( Alternate ) 
Col L. R. Sharma 

Dr a. G. Ajwani ( Alternate ) 
Dr L a. SiDDiQi 



Northern Railway, New Delhi 
Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, New 
Delhi 

Health Department, Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi, Delhi 



Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & 
Fats,- Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, 
New Delhi 
Shri S. M. Bhatnagar ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. S, Singh National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), 

Karnal 
Dr S. C. Sarma ( Alternate ) 
Dr T. a. V. Subramanian Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi 

Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri N. K, Grover 
Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



Hygienic Codes Subcommittee, AFDC 36 : 5 



Convener 
Dr R. S. Singh 

Members 

Agricultural Marketing Adviser 
TO THE Government of India 
Shri T. V. Mathew ( Alternate ) 
Dr N. P. Bhalla 



National Dairy Research Institute, ( iCAR ) 
Karnal 



Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, 
Faridabad 



Indian Veterinary Research Institute ( ICAR ), 
Izatnagar 
Dr S. B. Kulshreshtha ( Alternate ) 



Dr S. N. Brahme 

Dr D. N. Gore ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. R. Choudhuri 



Shri C. T. Dwarakanath 



Deonar Abbatoire, Bombay 

Department of Food Technology and 
Bio-chemical Engineering, Jadavpur 
University, Calcutta 

Central Food Technological Research 
Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) * 1984 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC CONDITIONS FOR 

PRODUCTION^ TRANSPORT, STORAGE 

AND DISTRIBUTION OF 

INDIGENOUS MILK PRODUCTS 

PART 4 FROZEN PRODUCTS KULfil 

o: FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Indian Stafi^ 
dards Institution on 5 March 1984, after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural 
and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 Indigenous milk products, such as KHOA^ KBOA based sweets> 
DAfff, RASGOLLA, CHfJANA are nroduced in large quantities in 
India. It has been often observed that proper hygienic conditions are 
not maintained in production, transport^ storage and distribution of 
these indigenous milk products and there is a considerable scope for 
improving the hygienic conditions in this respect. Unless proper 
hygienic norms are adopted, the consumption of such indigenous milk 
products may be a potential health hazard to the consumer. 

3 As the process of production, handling, transport, storage and 
distribution of various indigenous milk products differ very widely, 
codes of hygienic conditions for different milk products are being 
published in parts, Part 1 covers hygienic conditions for production, 
transport, storage and distribution of KUOA and KHOA based sweets. 
Part 2 covers DA til. Part 3 covers CtiftANA and CtiHAHA based 
sweetmeats, and Part 5 covers SRRIKtiAND. 

0.4 KVLPi is an indigenous ice cream product prepared by condensing 
milk to half its volume by heating, adding sugar during boiling and 
various nuts, MALAI and flavour after cooling and finally freezing the 
mixture in small moulds. 

0.5 Traditionally, cow, buffalo or mixed milk either as such or skimmed 
partially, is concentrated in a large open pan ( KADAHl, cauldron ) 
over direct flame. After cooling the concentrate for a while, sugar is 
added, followed by addition of other ingredients. Alternatively, KHOA 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

or skim-milk powdet is added to boiled and cooled milk and mixed 
prior to addition of additives. This mixture is filled in moulds, capped 
and caps sealed with wheat dough and finally frozen by immersion in 
salt-ice mixture in an earthen pitcher by shaking it to and fro. The 
frozen product is consumed either as such or alongwith added flavours, 
SHERBET, SEMIYA and a jelly like substance popularly known as 
FALUDA. Since the product contains all the essential nutrients of 
milk in a concentrated form and added starchy materials, it provides 
an ideal medium for rapid proliferation of most micro-organisms. 
During its preparation there is no protection against contamination 
from extraneous matter, such as dust, ash^ flies and pests. It may, 
hence, become a potential health hazard and a source of food poiso- 
ning. It is, therefore, necessary to take utmost precautions to protect 
the commodity from all possible siource of contamination during pro- 
duction, storage and distribution. This standard provides guidlines 
for maintaining optimum hygienic conditions in production, storage 
and distribution oT KULFL 

0.6 It is expected that this standard would be of considerable assistance 
to local health authorities in enforcing proper hygienic conditions in 
the interest of public health. 

0.7 This code is subject to the provisions of the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954 and the rules fi-ataed thereunder as ammended 
from time to time and other local regulation. 

0.8 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been 
derived from the National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code ( Part 4 ) prescribes the hygienic conditions and practices 
for production, storage, transportation and distribution oi KULFI 2iX\(i 
the like milk products. 

2. SITE AND PREMISES 

2.1 Site and piemises should be as given in 2 of IS : 10974 ( Part 1 > - 
1984*. 

3. RAW MATERIAL HANDLING 

3.1 Raw material handling should be as given in 4 of IS : 2491-1972t. 



•Code for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and distribut- 
ion of indigenous milk products; Part 1 KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 
fCode for hygienic conditions for food processing units ( first revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

4, FACTORY AND PROCESSING HYGIENE 

4.1 Factory and processing hygiene should be as given in 5 of 
IS : 2491-1972*. 

5. EQUIPMENTS 

5.1 Heating Pans 

5.1.1 KADAHIES ( heating pans ) of iron are generally used in small 
scale operation for heating milk on open fire for preparing KULFI. 
KADAHIES shaW be constructed with hemispherical or dished bottom 
and should have ligid weeded handles. The joints in the pan shall be 
welded and finished smooth. The component parts shall not be rive- 
ted. The KADAHI may be of 20 to 25 litres capacity. 

5.2 Heating of Milk 

5.2.1 Ovens of different types are used for heating of milk in the small 
scale production of KULFI. Wood, charcoal, coal, cow dung cake, 
kerosene or gas, are normally used as fuel. 

5.2.2 When open hearth is used, the fuel used for burning shoud not 
give rise to smoke or obnoxious odour which may be absorbed by the 
product. Adequate protection must be provided to ventilate the com- 
bustion products and to prevent the ash and unburnt material coming 
in contact with the product. 

5.2.3 Where heating is done by steam in large scale operations, the 
pan shall conform to IS : 2829-1979t. Stainless steel jacketted, round 
bottomed open pan provided with steam line, steam control and safety 
valves, pressure gauge and cold water line in the jackets, with steam 
trap and air outlet may be used. There should be arrangement for 
tilting the pan and also keeping it fixed in normal position. 

5.3 Stirrers — During heating of milk, the contents in the heating pan 
are constantly stirred to facilitate evaporation of moisture and to 
prevent charring of casein. For this purpose, steel, hand operated 
stirrers are generally used. Stainless steel or aluminium alloy stirrers 
with flattened end on one side may preferably be used in place of iron. 
Suitable arrangement may be made on the brim of the heating pan for 
resting of stirrers. 

5.4 All the components and metallic parts which come in contact with 
milk shall be constructed from iron or stainless steel conforming 



♦Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units ( first revision ). 
fSpecification for steam-jacketed GHEE jpans ( stainless steel ) (first revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

to grade 07 Cr 18 Ni 9 of IS : 1570 ( Part 5 )-1972* Or aluminium con- 
forming to IS Designation 31000 ( NS3 ), 52000 ( NS4 ) or 53000 (NS5) 
ofIS: 737-1974t. 

5.5 Copper and its alloys, cadmium, lead and zinc shall not come in 
contact with milk at any stage. 

5.6 Non metallic materials, if used for sealing or gasketting shall be 
nontoxic, non absorbent and shall not impart any flavour and should 
be inert to milk, KULFI or any cleaning solution normally used. 

5.7 Fabrication — All surfaces coming in contact with milk or KULFt 
shall be finished smooth, free from pits, crevices or other constructional 
features which might inhibit satisfactory sanitation. 

5.8 Containers ( Moulds, Cones ) 

5.8.1 Usually galvanized iron sheet moulds are used. They have a 
conical shape and diameter of about 2"5 cm at the bottom and 50 cm 
at the top with a length of about 7'5 cm and nicely fitting lids. This 
size may vary with the requirements of the manufacturer. 

5.8.1.1 Plastic containers of above size also are now m vogue^-which 
are comparatively more hygienical. 

5.8.2 Cleaning and sterilization of moulds ( see IS : 28024964J ). 

5.9 Freezing Equipment 

5.9.1 An earthen pot ( pitcher) of about 30 to 40 litre capacity which 
can freeze about 50 to 60 moulds at a time is generally used. It shall 
be thoroughly cleaned, washed and sanitized, before and after every use 
everyday using a good brush ( preferably of synthetic bristles ), and 
an odourless bactericidal solution, such as quaternary ammonium 
compounds. 

5.9.2 Salt-Ice Mixture — A good quantity of a chipped ice with 
about 20 percent of common salt, or some times rock salt, is added into 
the pitcher. The salt and ice shall be of good grade free from visible 
impurities, dust, and hygienically collected. Ice used shall be manu- 
factured from potable water. 

5.9.3 Wheat flour used for preparing the dough for sealing the lids of 
moulds with the main body shall be made from a good quality wheat 



♦Schedules for wrought steds; Part 5 Staiulessf and heat resisting steel (7?rs/^ 
revision ). 

tSpecification for wrought aluminiutn and aluminium alloys, sheet aad strip ( for 
general engineering purposes ) ( second revision >. 
^Specification for ice-cream. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

which would have been floured and stored under hygienical conditions. 
Alternatively, cellophane tape or medicated adhesive tape may be used 
for proper and leakproof sealing. 

6. RECEPTION DOCK 

6.1 Milk brought to the factory shall be received in an airy spacious 
enclosure. Only fresh, sweet, clean milk free from colostrum and in 
every way fit for human consumption shall be used. The milk shall be 
free from adulterants, preservatives and any matter foreign to milk. 

7. WATER 

7.1 Water used in the preparation of KULFI shall be free from micro- 
organisms likely to cause disease. 

8. SWEETENING AGENT 

8.1 Cane sugar is the most commonly used sweetening agent in the 
preparation of milk based sweets. Sugar used should be of good 
quality ( see IS : 1679-1960* ). 

9. OTHER INGREDIENTS 

9.1 KHOAy if used to concentrate the milk, shall conform to 
IS '- 4883-1980t; whereas the skim-milk powder, if used, shall conform 
to IS : 11 65-1975 1 

9.1.1 In homes there is a tendency to use infant milk foods for con- 
centrating milk. In such case it shall conform to IS : 1547-1968§. 

9.2 Additives, like condiments and spices, used for the preparation of 
KULFI ^haW conform to the specification given in IS : 5550-1970|!. 

9.3 MAIDA used in the preparation of SEMIYA shall conform to 
IS : 1009-197911. 

9.4 FALUDA to be used as a supplement to the KULFI shall be pre- 
pared from a good food grade arrowroot starch stored in a dry cool 
place protected from insects and rodents. 

9.5 Flavoaring Materials — Various artificial or imitation flavours are 
added to KULFI mix. As most of them are prepared and maintained 
in the form of alcoholic solutions and used in small amounts, they 

*Speciflcation for sugar used in food preservation industry. 

fSpeciflcation for KHOA ( first revision ). 

JSpecification for milk powder ( second revision ). 

§Specification for infant milk foods {first revision ). 

fISpecification for BURFI. 

^Specification for MAIDA for general purposes ( second revision ). 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

are not considered to be significant sources of contamination. AqUeOUS 
flavour extracts may be sanitized by pasteurization at 63°C for 30 
minutes without any serious deterioration in the flavour. 

9.6 Fruits and fruit juices to be added shall be of good quality and 
fruits be washed very thoroughly in potassium permanganate solution. 
They should be pealed with clean, rust free, preferably stainless steel 
knives ( IS : 2498-1983* ) and cut or mashed in clean and hygienic con- 
ditions. The juice shall be extracted in good, clean and sanitized 
vessels. 

9.7 SHERBETS shall be made from sugar as mentioned in 8, 

9.8 In case of MALAI-KI-BARAF where MALAI— the creamy layer 
formed on the surface of milk after boiling and then left to cool undis- 
turbed— forms the chief ingredient. The MALAI shall be collected iii 
clean utensils. The colourings to be added shall be of food grade 
permitted under of Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and 
should preferably be added prior to giving final heat treatment. 

10. COOLING OF MIXTURE 

10.1 KULFI mixture shall be allowed to cool for a while at the room 
temperature before filling into cones ( moulds ). 

10.2 Filling in Cones — The KULFI mixture shall be filled up to the 
brim in the cones, covered tightly with the lid and sealed with a thick 
layer of dough ( see 5.9.3 ). Rubber bands may also be used for faste- 
ning the lids before applying dough. 

10.3 Freezing the Filled Cones — The cones shall be transferred to the 
ice-salt mixture in the pitcher without losing time. The pitcher shall 
be shaken to and fro thoroughly to bring about effective freezing in a 
short time. 

11. STORAGE OF KULFI 

11.1 The finished product shall be allowed to remain in the same 
pitcher or, transferred to, deep freeze at — 20°C for storage at the 
manufacturer's premises. 

12. TRANSPORT 

12.1 The KULFI should be traflsported hy sttitable system^ in the 
pitcher or in an ice-chest containing ice-salt mixture. The transport 
vehicle shall be clean and made such as not to give any jerks during 
movement. 



•Specification for cheese knife. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

13. STORAGE AND SALE OF KULFI 

13.1 The finished product shall always be stored in the cones kept in 
ice-salt mixture which should be replenished from time to time. It 
shall not be carried over to the next day. 

13.2 The push cart used for storing and selling KULFI shall have a 
metallic roof and the walls made of good grade glass panes. It shall be 
provided with a sliding window for removing KULFI from the ice 
chest. Utmost care shall be taken to protect the inside of the push 
carts from roadside dust, flies, other insects, birds and rodents. 

13.3 The knife ( see IS : 2498-1963* ) used to scrape away the dough 
from the cone and open its cap and subsequently cut the KULFI into 
pieces shall be made from good quality mild steel or stainless steel and 
kept clean and dry. It shall be sanitized in quaternary ammonium 
compounds or iodophor solution. 

13.4 The plates and spoons used for serving the preparation shall be 
thoroughly cleaned and rinsed before use and given a dip or two in a 
sanitizer solution, for example, quarternary ammonium compound 
( 50 ppm ), iodophor ( 5 ppm ), or chlorine solution ( 15-20 ppm ) just 
prior to adding KULFI on to the plate. 

13.4.1 The used utensils shall be washed in fresh water, preferably 
running tap water, using soap or detergent solution and then drained 
and dried. 

13.5 Suitable arrangements shall be made for proper drainage and 
disposal of wash and waste water ( see 3.12 of IS : 249l-1972f ). 

14. OPERATION PRACTICES AND PRODUCTION REQUIRE- 
MENTS 

14.1 Operation practices and production requirements should be as 
given in 14 of IS : 2491-1972t. 

15. EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

15.1 Employee hyaiene should be as given in 13 of IS : ( Part I ) - 
1984t. 



*Specificatin for cheese knife. 

tCode for hygienic conditions for food processing units {first revision ). 
JCode for hygienic conditions for production, transport, storage and distribution 
of indigenous milk products: Part 1 KHOA and KHOA based sweets. 



IS : 10974 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr B. N. Ghcbh ah India Institute of Hygiene and Public 

Health, Calcutta 
Dr S. p. Mukhopadhyay ( Alternate ) 
Dr B C. Ghoshal Central Health Education Bureau ( DGHS ), 

New Delhi 
Dr M. N. Gurnani Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bombay 

JojNT Director ( Prevention of Delhi Administration, Delhi 

Food Adulteration ) 
CoL O. p. Kapur Central Food Laboratory, Mysore 

Dr V. V. Karnik Brooke Bond India Limited, Aurangabad 

Dr S. J, Paroikar { Alternate ) 
Dr B. K, N andi Food and Nutrition Board, Ministry of Food 

and Civil Supplies, New Delhi 
Shri Harpal Singh (Alternate ) 
Dr p. V. R. C. Panicker National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute { CSIR ), Nagpur 
Dr ( SHRiMATi ) A. S. Gadkari ( Alternate^) 
Shri Ravi Krishna Britannia Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Secretary Central Committee for Food Standards, New 

Delhi 
Brig R. N. Verma QMG's Branch. Army Headquarters, New 

Delhi 
Lt-Col K. N. Acharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri Katlash Vyas Kaira Dtstt Cooperative Milk Producers' 

Union Limited, Anand 
Dr BRfJESH Narayan ( Alternate ) 



10 



AMENfDMENT NO. 1 MAY 2002 

TO 

IS 10974 ( Part 4 ) : 1984 CODE FOR HYGIENIC 

CONDITIONS FOR PRODUCTION, TRANSPORT, 

STORAGE AND DISTRIBUTION OF INDIGENOUS MILK 

PRODUCTS 

Part 4 FROZEN PRODUCTS KULFI 

( Page 4, clause 3.1, and page 5, clause 4.1 ) — *IS 2491 : 1998' for 
'IS 2491 : 1972'. 

[ Page 4, footnote with dagger (t) mark ] — Substitute the following for the 
existing footnote: 

'tFood hygiene — General Priniciples — Ccxte of practice ( second revision ).' 

[ Page 5, footnote with aesterisk (*) mark ] — Substitute the following for 
the existing footnote: 

♦Food hygiene — General Priniciples — Code of practice ( second revision ).' 

( Page 6, clause 5.9.1 ) — Insert the following sentence at the end: 

'For large scale operations, hardening chamber may also be used.' 

( Page 9, clause 13.1, last sentence ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 

'The product should always be kept in frozen conditions and shall preferably not 
be carried over to the next day.' 

( Page 9 clause 13.2 ) — Substitute the following for the existing: 

'13.2 The push cart used for storing and selling of KULFI shall have a 
metallic/unbreakable polycarbonate/reinforced plastic roof and a closed chamber 
or deep freezer with suitable opening.' 

( FAD 45 ) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



