**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14135 (1994): Code for Hygienic Practices for Processing 
and Handling of Dehydrated Fruits and Vegetables Including 
Edible Fungi [FAD 15: Food Hygiene, Safety Management and 
Other Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14135: 1994 

(Reaffirmed 2005) 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR 

PROCESSING AND HANDLING OF 

DEHYDRATED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 

INCLUDING EDIBLE FUNGI 



UDC 664.83/86.047:613.2:006.76 



© BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

July 1994 Price Group 4 



Food Hygiene Sectional Committee, FAD 45 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Food 
Hygiene Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council, 

Customers do not have the available knowledge or means of determining the hygienic quality of the food 
they purchase. For this, they rely on the hygienic standards of various industries that prepare and handle 
foods. Unless the factory producing the food is governed by a strict hygienic code in respect of layout, 
plant and personnel, the quality of food produced cannot be considered as safe. These factors have been 
taken into consideration in the preparation of this Code. 

This Code is an adjunct to IS 2491 : 1972 Code for hygienic conditions for food processing units (first 
revision)* and it covers requirements specific to the units for processing and handling of dehydrated fruits 
and vegetables. 

This code is subject to the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 and the Prevention of Food Adulteration 
Act, 1954 and the Rules framed thereunder and the Fruit Products Order, 1955, amended up-to-date. 

In ihc preparation of this Code, considerable assistance has been derived from the Recommended 
International Code of Hygienic Practice for Dehydrated Fruits and Vegetables including Edible Fungi 
CAC/RCP 5-1971, published by Codex Alimcntarius Commission. 

This basic principles of hygiene underlining the technical advice in this Code should be applied with 
appropriate modifications to all types of dehydrated fruits and vegetables. 



IS 14135 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

CODE FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR 

PROCESSING AND HANDLING OF 

DEHYDRATED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 

INCLUDING EDIBLE FUNGI 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This Code of hygienic practices applies to fruits 
and vegetables which are artificially dehydrated (in- 
cluding freeze-dried), either from the succulent 
stage or in combination with sun-drying, and covers 
the products commonly associated with the phrase 
'dehydrated food'. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are neces- 
sary adjuncts to this standard. 

3 PLANT CONSTRUCTION AND FACILITIES 

3.1 Site 

3.1.1 Units for processing and handling of 
dehydrated fruits and vegetables shall preferably be 
situated in open, clean and healthy surroundings 
away from cattle sheds, open sewage drains, gar- 
bage dumps or other places likely to breed flies. It 
shall be free from sources of obnoxious fumes, 
smoke, odours or excessive dust. There shall not be 
accumulation of trash, garbage or similar waste in 
the vicinity of the unit. 

3.2 Building 

3.2.1 The structure shall be of permanent nature 
and shall be suitable in size, construction and 
design to facilitate maintenance and hygienic 
operations for processing purposes. It should pro- 
vide sufficient space for housing of equipment and 
storage of materials (raw as well as finished 
products) as is necessary for hygienic operations. 
The material of construction shall be bricks, 
plaster, cement, concrete, tiles or any other 
equivalent materials which ensure cleanliness. 

3.2.1.1 Construction of the building shall be fcuch 
that it shall be rodentproof, flyproof and birdproof. 

3.2.2 No portion of building shall be used for 
domestic purposes or other types of food prepara- 
tions unless separated by suitable partitions or 
locations or other effective means so as to avoid 



contamination of the product with undesirable 
micro-organisms, smoke, gases, odour, chemicals, 
filth or other foreign material. 

3.2.3 Areas where raw materials are received or 
stored should be so separate from areas in which, 
final product preparation is conducted as to 
preclude contamination of finished product. Areas 
and compartments used for storage, manufacture 
or handling of edible products should be separate 
and distinct from those used for inedible material. 

3.3 Ventilation and Lighting 

3.3.1 The premises shall be adequately lighted and 
ventilated. Light bulbs and fixtures suspended in 
the processing area shall be of safety type and shall 
not be fixed above the processing table to prevent 
contamination of food in case of breakage. Ventila- 
tion and lighting shall also be in accordance with 
the Factories Act, 1948 [see also IS 3103 : 1975 and 
IS 3646 (Parts 1, 2 and 3) : 1966J. Exhaust fans 
should be provided, where necessary. 

3.3.2 Special attention should be given to the vent- 
ing of areas and equipment producing excessive 
heat, steam, obnoxious fumes or vapours or con- 
taminating aerosols. Good ventilation is important 
to prevent both condensation (which may drip into 
the product) and mould growth in overhead struc- 
tures (which growth may fall into the food). Light 
bulbs and fixtures suspended over food in any step 
of preparation should be of the safety type or other- 
wise protected to prevent food contamination in 
the case of breakage. 

3.4 Floor 

The floor shall be smooth, free from crevices, wash- 
able, properly sloped to gullies connected to sewers 
or drains. It shall be impervious to water and not 
affected by weak acids, alkalies or steam. Cemented 
floor shall be made for work room, store room and 
godown. 

3*5 Walls and Ceilings 

Internal walls and ceilings should have smooth, 
non-absorbent light-coloured surface, free from 



1 



IS 14135: 1994 



crevices and sharp angles, to facilitate their efficient 
cleaning. The junction of the floor with the walls 
and the junction between the two walls should be 
rounded to prevent accumulation of dust. 

3.6 Repairs 

The building shall be maintained in a proper state 
of repair and cleanliness at all times. Whenever 
required, it may be lime washed, painted, disin- 
fected, disinfestcd and deodorized. 

3.7 Drainage 

Effective drainage should be provided to drain off 
a large quantity of water used for washing the raw 
material, machinery equipment, tables, floor, etc; 
15 to 30 cm half circular drains with glazed pipe at 
the bottom should be provided. The slope of the 
floor should be towards the drains and the farthest 
end of the floor from the drains should not be more 
than 5 m. The drain openings should be provided 
with screen traps to prevent solid matter from clog- 
ging the drains. The ends of the drains leading to 
the outside of the factory should be made rodent- 
proof by providing screens. The screens shall be 
examined periodically and replaced or cleaned, if 
. necessary. The drains should have water seals of 
minimum 5 cm dia. At least 50 percent of the length 
of the drain should be covered to facilitate the 
movement of trolleys. Mesh type cover for the drain 
should be better to prevent habitation of cock- 
roaches and rodents in closed areas of the drain. 

3.8 Water Supply 

3.8.1 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water (see IS 4251 : 1967). Running water 
under pressure shall be easily accessible to all 
rooms and areas in which food is handled and 
equipment is washed. 

3.8.2 The equipment shall be so installed and used 
that back siphonage of liquid into the potable water 
line is precluded. 

3.8.3 The storage tanks for water should, unless 
completely sealed, be kept covered with tight fitting 
lids, examined regularly and cleaned at least once 
every six months. The date of the last cleaning and 
next cleaning shall be prominently displaced on the 
storage tanks. 

3.8.4 The water shall be periodically examined as 
desired by the Licensing Authority chemically and 
bactcriologically. A record of such examination 
shall be maintained. 

3.8.5 Auxiliary Wafer Supply 

Where non-potable water is used for such purposes 
as fire control it must be carried in completely 
separate lines, identified preferably by colour and 



with no cross-connection or back-siphonage with 
the lines carrying potable water. 

4 RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Environmental Sanitation in Growing and 
Food Production Area 

4.1.1 Sanitary Disposal of Human and Animal 
Waste 

Adequate precautions should be taken to ensure 
that human and animal wastes are disposed off in 
such a manner as not to constitute a public health 
or hygienic hazard, and extreme care should be 
taken to protect the product from contamination 
with these wastes. 

4.1.2 Sanitary Quality of Irrigation Water 

Water used for irrigation should not constitute a 
public health hazard to the consumer through the 
product. 

4.1.3 Animal, Plant, Pest and Disease Control 

Where control measures are undertaken, treat- 
ment with chemical, biological or physical agents 
should be done only in accordance with the recom- 
mendations of the appropriate official agency, by or 
under the direct supervision of personnel with a 
thorough understanding of the hazards involved, 
including the possibility of toxic residues being 
retained by the crop. 

4.2 Sanitary Harvesting and Food Production 

4.2.1 Equipment and Product Containers 

Equipment and product containers should not con- 
stitute a hazard to health. Containers which are 
reused should be of such material and construction 
as will facilitate thorough cleaning, and should be 
so cleaned and maintained as not to constitute a 
source of contamination to the product. 

4.2.2 Sanitary Techniques 

Harvesting and production operations, methods 
and procedures should be clean and sanitary. 

4.2.3 Removal of Obviously Unfit Materials 

Unfit products should be segregated during har- 
vesting and production to the fullest extent prac- 
ticable and should be disposed off in such a place 
and in such a manner that they cannot result in 
contamination of the food and water supplies or 
other crops. 

4.2.4 Protection of Product from Contamination 

Suitable precautions should be taken to protect the 
raw product from being contaminated by animals, 



IS 14135 ; 1994 



insects, vermin, birds, chemicals or microbiological 
contaminants or other objectionable substance 
during handling and storage. The nature of the 
product and the method of harvesting will indicate 
the type and degree of protection required. 

4.3 Transportation 

4.3.1 Facilities 

Conveyances for transporting the harvested crop or 
raw product from the production area, place of 
harvest or storage should be adequate for the pur- 
pose intended and should be of such material and 
construction as will permit thorough cleaning and 
should be so cleaned and maintained as not to 
constitute a source of contamination to the 
product. 

4.3.2 Handling Procedures 

All handling procedures should be such as will 
prevent the product from being contaminated. Ex- 
treme care should be taken in transporting perish- 
able products to prevent spoilage or deterioration. 
Special equipment - such as refrigeration equip- 
ment - should be used if the nature of the product 
or distances involved so indicate. 

5 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT HYGIENE 

5.1 Material 

AH food contact surface should be smooth; free 
from pits, crevices and loose scale; non-toxic; unaf- 
fected by food products; capable of withstanding 
repeated exposure to normal cleaning; and non-ab- 
sorbent unless the nature of a particular and other- 
wise acceptable process renders the use of a surface, 
such as wood, necessary. 

5*2 Sanitary Design, Construction and Installa- 
tion 

Equipment and utensils should be so designed and 
constructed as will prevent hygienic hazards and 
permit easy and thorough cleaning. Stationary 
equipment should be installed in such a manner as 
will permit easy and thorough cleaning. 

5.3 Equipment and Utensils 

Equipment and utensils used for inedible or con- 
taminating materials should be so identified and 
should not be used for handling edible products. 

5.4 Construction of Drying Equipment 

Equipment used for drying should be so con- 
structed and operated that the product cannot be 
adversely affected by the drying medium, 

5.5 In areas experiencing high concentration of 
airborne pollutants, equipment shall be used to 



remove the pollutants from the air blown across or 
through the product. 

6 GENERAL HYGIENE 

6.1 For general cleanliness, all the floors shall be 
swept and washed with detergent at least once in a 
shift. 

6.2 Waste and rubbish shall be collected in covered 
receptacles and shall not be allowed to scatter on 
the floor of the unit. It shall be disposed off in a 
manner which is not detrimental to the hygiene of 
the surroundings after its disposal. 

6.3 Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent 
mould growth on equipment and internal struc- 
tures of processing and storage rooms. Adequate 
steps shall be taken to prevent infestation by cock- 
roaches and other households pests. 

6.4 When pesticides are used, due care shall be 
exercised to prevent contamination of equipment, 
raw materials and packaging materials. Under no 
circumstances shall any pesticides be used during 
processing. 

6.5 Floors and drains shall be kept clean. The 
drains shall be made pucca with proper slope and 
be swept and washed periodically in order to keep 
them free from any deposits. The deposits provide 
suitable substrate for fast growth of the micro-or- 
ganisms. 

6.6 There shall be an adequate supply of safe and 
potable water. The storage tank for water shall, 
unless completely scaled, be kept covered with tight 
fitting lids, examined and cleaned regularly. 

6.7 Proper places shall be provided for storage of 
brooms, brushes, buckets and other cleaning gear. 

6.8 Window glass and light fittings shall be main- 
tained clean and dust-free at all times. 

6.9 There shall be no cobwebs in any part of the 
unit. Birds and domestic animals shall not be al- 
lowed in any part of the unit. 

6.10 No lavatory, sink, cesspool or garbage shall be 
so situated or maintained that odours or fumes 
therefrom pervade any room where the product or 
raw materials are prepared or stored. 

6.11 The doors andwindows shall be such that they 
would not allow entry of flies or any other type of 
crawling insects and birds. 

6.12 The factory effluents shall be disposed off 
from the factory in a manner which is not detrimen- 
tal to the hygiene of the factory and its surround- 
ings. The effluents shall not be let off on road or in 
the open outside the factory premises. 



IS 14135 : 1994 



7 OPERATION PRACTICES AND PRODUC- 
TION REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 Raw Material Handling 

7.1.1 Acceptance Criteria 

Only sound and wholesome raw materials should 
be used. Raw materials should not be accepted by 
the plant if known to contain decomposed toxic or 
extraneous substances which will not be removed 
to acceptable levels by normal plant procedures of 
sorting or preparation. 

7.1.2 Storage* 

Raw materials stored in the plant premises should 
be maintained under conditions that will protect 
them against contamination and infestation and 
minimize deterioration. 

7.2 Inspection and Sorting 

Prior to introduction into the processing line, or at 
a convenient point within it, raw materials should 
be inspected, sorted or culled as required to remove 
unfit materials. Such operations should be carried out 
in a clean and sanitary manner. Only clean, sound 
materials should be used in further processing. 

7.3 Washing or Other Preparation 

Raw materials should be washed as needed to 
remove soil or other contamination. Water used for 
such purposes should not be recirculated unless 
suitably treated to maintain it in a condition as will 
not constitute a public health hazard. Water used 
for washing, rinsing or conveying final food 
products should be of potable quality. 

7.4 Preparation and Processing 

Preparatory operations leading to the finished 
product and the packaging operations should be so 
timed as to permit expeditious handling of consecu- 
tive units in production under conditions which 
would prevent contamination, deterioration, 
spoilage, or the development of infectious or 
toxigenic micro-organisms. 

7.5 Packaging of Finished Product 

7.5.1 Materials 

The packaging materials should be stored in a clean 
and sanitary manner. The packaging material 
should provide appropriate protection from con- 
tamination and should not permit objectionable 
substances to the product beyond limits acceptable 
to the official agency having jurisdiction. 

7.5.2 Techniques 

The packaging should be done under conditions 
that preclude the introduction of contamination 
into the product. 



7.6 Preservation of Finished Product 

Methods of preservation or treatment of the 
finished product should be such as to kill any insects 
or mites remaining after processing and to result in 
protection against contamination, deterioration, 
or development of a public health hazard. The 
finished product should be of such moisture con- 
tent that it can be held in the localities of origin and 
distrubution under any normally foreseeable con- 
ditions for those localities without significant 
deterioration by decay, mould, enzymatic changes, 
or other causes. 

7.7 Storage and Transport of Finished Products 

The finished products should be stored and 
transported under such conditions as will preclude 
the contamination with or development of 
pathogenic or toxigenic micro-organisms and 
protect against rodent and insect infestation and 
deterioration of the product or of the container. 

a) The product should be stored under 
suitable conditions of time, temperature, 
humidity, and atmosphere, to prevent sig- 
nificant deterioration. Humidity control is 
of primary importance for dehydrated/ 
dried product. 

b) Where dehydrated products are stored 
under conditions in which they may be- 
come infested by insects and mites, ap- 
propriate methods of protection should be 
used regularly. 

The dehydrated products should be stored in such 
a manner that thay can be fumigated in situ or so 
stored that they can be removed elsewhere for 
fumigation in special facilities (for example, 
fumigation chambers, steel, barges, etc). 

Cold storage can be used, either to prevent infesta- 
tion in localities where insects are likely to be 
present in ordinary storage or to prevent insects 
damaging the product. 

8 HYGIENE CONTROL PROCEDURE 

8.1 Sanitation Control Programme 

It is desirable that each plant designates a 
single individual, whose duties are preferably 
different from production, to be held respon- 
sible for the cleanliness of the plant. His staff 
should be a permanent part of the organization 
and should be well trained in the use of special 
cleaning tools, methods of disassembling 
equipment for cleaning, and in the significance 
of contamination and the hazards involved. 
Critical areas, equipment and materials should 
be designated for specific attention as part of a 
permanent sanitation schedule. 



8*2 Laboratory Control Procedures 

In addition to anycontrolby the official agency having 
jurisdiction, it is desirable that each plant in its own 
interest should have access to laboratory control of 
the sanitary quality of the products processed. The 
amount and type of such control will vaiy with the 
food product as well as the needs of management 
Such control should reject all foods that are unfit for 
human consumption. Analytical procedures used 
should follow recognised or standard methods in 
order that the results may be readily interpreted 

9 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

9.1 Every person employed for handling of raw 
materials and end products and in packing section 
in the factory shall be medically examined by an 
authorized registered medical practitioner and the 
examination shall include X-ray of the chest for 
tuberculosis. The examination shall also include: 
examination of stool for protozoal and helminthic 
infestation for those parasites which are trans- 
mitted by ingestion, and for the presence of Sal- 
monella, Shigella species and Vibro cholerae. 
Subsequently, the employee shall be medically ex- 
amined once in a year or more frequently, if neces- 
sary, to ensure that he/she is medically fit and free 
from communicable diseases. A record of such ex- 
amination shall be maintained. 

9.1.1 It shall be impressed on all employees that 
they should notify the medical officer or manage- 
ment, cases of fever, vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, 
dysentary, boils, cuts and sores and ulcers (however 
small), discharging ears and notifiable diseases 
occurring in their own homes and families. 

9.1.2 No worker who is suspected to be suffering 
from any of the disorders listed above shall be 
permitted to work inside the unit. The supervisor 
shall check the personal hygiene of the workers 
befeore the start of work and whenever they enter 
any processing room after any absence. 

9.2 Employees shall keep their finger nails short 
and clean and wash their hands with soap or deter- 
gent and water before commencing work and after 
each absence, specially after using sanitary con- 
veniences. Towels used for drying hands should be 
clean. No worker shall allow his hands or any part 



IS 14135: 1994 

of his body or clothing to come in contact with the 
food. He/she should adopt strict hygienic practices 
so as to avoid adding any microbial contamination 
to the material. Women employees shall keep their 
hair tied into a knot under head gear. 

93 All employees shall be inoculated and vac- 
cinated against the enteric groups of diseases once 
a year. In case of an epidemic, all workers shall be 
inoculated. A record shall be maintained. 

9-4 No worker shall be allowed to work without 
proper clothing and foot wear. 

9J5 Employees shall be provided with clean 
uniforms (preferably white) or aprons or both 
mouth masks and clean washable caps where neces- 
sary. 

9.5.1 Separate room or place for changing the 
clothes shall be provided. The clothes shall not be 
hung in any processing room. 

9*6 Eating, spitting, nose cleaning or the use of 
tobacco in any form or chewing betel leaves shall be 
prohibited within the manufacturing, packing and 
storage area of the unit. Notice to this effect shall 
be prominently displayed and enforced. 

9.7 Sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences 
shall be provided, maintained and kept clean in 
every factory. The conveniences shall be properly 
lighted. Separate conveniences shall be provided 
for each sex. No convenience shall open directly 
into any work room in the factory. The convenien- 
ces shall always be maintained clean and in good 
repairs. 

9.8 Sufficient number of wash basins with ade- 
quate provision of nail brushes, soap, and towels, 
shall be installed in or alongside the sanitary con- 
veniences. 

10 CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENE AND SANITA- 
TION 

10.1 A check list for use by a responsible officer of 
the management is given in Annex B. It shall be 
used at regular intervals to ensure hygienic sanita- 
tion and safety measures. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 2 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. Title 

3103 : 1975 Code of practice for industrial ven- 
tilation (first revision) 



IS No. 



Title 



3646 (Part 1) : Code of practice for interior il- 
1992 lumination: Part 1 General re- 



IS 14135 : 19W 

ISNo. 



3646 (Part 2) 
1966 



Title IS No, 

quirements & recommendations 
for working interior (first revision) 

Code of practice for interior il- 
lumination : Part 2 Schedule of il- 4251 : 1967 
lumination and glare index 



Title 

3646 (Part 3) : Codeof practice for interior illumina- 
1968 tion:Part3 Calculation of co-efficient 
of utilisation by the B2 methods 

Quality tolerance for water for 
processed food industry. 



ANNEXE 

( Clause 10.1 ) 

CHECK LIST FOR HYGIENIC PRACTICES FOR PROCESSING AND HANDLING OF 
DEHYDRATED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES INCLUDING EDIBLE FUNGI 



B-l 
B-L 

B-L 
B-2 
B-2. 

B-2. 
B-2. 

B-2, 
B-2, 

B-2 
B-2- 
B-2, 
B-2, 
B-2 
B-3 
B-3 
B-3 



SITE 

1 Are there any sources producing obnoxious fumes, smoke, odours or exces- 
sive dust nearby? 

2 Any cattle sheds/garbage dumps/tannery and open sewage drains nearby? 
BUILDING 

1 Is the structure of permanent nature and of suitable size to house the entire 
infrastructure? 

2 Is the building rodent-proof, fly-proof, insect-proof and bird-proof? 

3 Is any part of the building being used for domestic purposes/food prepara- 
tions without proper partitions? 

4 Are the premises adequately lighted and ventilated? 

.5 Are the floors smooth and clean and being maintained properly without any 

breakages/crevices? 
.6 Are the roofs/ceilings free of water leakage? 

7 Are the doors/windows having proper netting/mesh? 

,8 Are schedule repairs, white-washing, disinfection being carried out regularly? 

,9 Are the lights shielded to prevent broken glasses contaminating the product? 

10 Is the drainage system satisfactory? 

RAW MATERIAL 



.1 Is the produce cultivated in proper surroundings? 

2 Does the water quality used for irrigation constitute a public hazard through 

the product to consumer? 

B-3,3 Are the disease control measures during irrigation taken as per the recom- 

mendations of the concerned authorities? 

B-3.4 Is the produce harvested with equipment that does not constitute a hazard 

to health? 

B-3.5 Are all the unfit materials disposed off suitably? 

B-3.6 Is the raw product protected from contamination? 

B-3.7 Do the techniques used in handling products prevent contamination of the 

product? 

B-3.8 Arc the raw materials received and stored separately from the finished 

product? 

B-3.9 Is sorting done to remove unfit materials before processing? 

B-3. 10 Is raw material washed by using potable water? 

B-4 PIANT, EQUIPMENT AND GENERAL HYGIENE 

B-4.1 Are all the surfaces coming in contact with food smooth, free from pits, 

crevices, loose scales etc? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



IS 14135 : 1994 



B-4.2 Arc these surfaces made of non-absorbent and non-toxic material? 

B-4.3 Is the equipment so designed and constructed that it permits easy and 

thorough cleaning? 
B-4.4 Is the equipment used for inedible or contaminating material identified and 

kept separately? 

B-4.5 Does the drying medium adversely affect the product? 

B-4,6 In areas of high air pollution, is the air used for drying made pollutant free 

before; use? 

B-4.7 Are the floors swept/washed with detergent at least once a shift? 

B-4.8 Is the waste and rubbish kept in covered receptacles before disposal? 

B-4,9 Is there any mould growth on the internal structures of processing and 

storage rooms? 

B-4.10 Are the premises kept free from cockroaches and other household pests and 

rodents? 
B-4.11 Are the drains cleaned regularly? 

B-4.12 Are the doors and windows properly protected to prevent the entry of flies? 

B-4,13 Is the processing area free from dust, cobwebs, domestic animals and odours, 

fumes, etc 

B-4.14 Are all the parts of equipment coming into contract with food, sanitized 

before use? 
B-4.15 Is there adequate supply of potable water? 

B-4.16 Is the potable water stored in clean storage tank and examined regularly? 

B-4.17 Is the water being analysed for its potability and record of such analysis being 

maintained? 
B-4.18 In case non-potable water is used for other purpose (like fire fighting), are 

there separate lines for the same? 

B-5 PROCESSING, PACKING AND STORAGE 

B-5.1 Is the process of drying right from preparatory operation till packing so 

planned that it prevents contamination, deterioration, spoilage of the 
product or development of infectious or toxigenic micro-organisms? 

B-5.2 Is the packing material stored in a clean and sanitory manner? 

B-5.3 Does the method of preservation provide protection against contamination 

and deterioration of the product? 

B-5.4 Are the finished products stored under proper conditions and protected 

against spoilage? 

B-6 CONTROL AND MONITORING PROCEDURES 

B-6.1 Is there a defined sanitation schedule? Is it being followed? 

B-6.2 Is the responsibility for cleanliness vested in a specifically trained person with 

supporting staff? 

B-6.3 Is there laboratory control of the sanitary quality of the products processed? 

B-6.4 Are there defined analytical procedures for rejection of products that are 

unfit for human consumption? 

B-7 EMPLOYEE HYGIENE 

B-7.1 Are the employees being subjected to complete medical examination by 

authorised Registered Medical Practitioner at least once an year? 

B-7.2 Is record of medical examination of employees maintained? 

B-7.3 Are cases of fever, vomitting, diarrhoea, typhoid, dysentry, boils, cuts, sores, 

ulcers or any other notifiable diseases reported by the employees? 

B-7.4 Are any of the employees suffering from any of the above disorders allowed 

to work inside the unit? 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 

Yes/No 



Yes/No 

Yes/No 
Yes/No 

Yes/No 



IS 14135 : 1994 

B-7.5 Are the employees inocculated and vaccinated against the enteric group of Yes/No 

diseases once a year and record maintained thereof? 
B-7.6 Are the employees keeping finger nails short and clean? Yes/No 

B-7.7 Are the employees washing their hands with soap or detergent, especially Yes/No 

after using sanitary conveniences? 
B-7.8 Is any employee chewing tobacco, smoking, eating or drinking in manufac- Yes/No 

turing, packing and storage area? 
B-7.9 Are the employees wearing washed and clean uniform? Yes/No 

B-7,10 Are the employees wearing head gears. Arc the female employees keeping Yes/No 

their hair tied under the head gear? 

B-7.11 Are sufficient number of sanitary conveniences and wash basins provided Yes/No 

for the employees? 

B-7,12 Is there adequate water supply, soaps/detergents available for sanitary con- Yes/No 

veniences? 

B-7.13 Are there adequate provisions for drying hands after washing? Yes/No 

B-7.14 Are the floors and wash basins of toilets being thoroughly cleaned? Yes/No 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude he free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on. the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Us^rs of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the) latest issue of 
4 BIS Handbook' and * Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. FAD 45 ( 250 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme YII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern ; SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
BOMBAY 400093 



( 3 

13 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

f331 01 31 

[331 13 75 

{37 84 99, 37 85 61 
U7 86 26, 37 86 62 

/53 38 43, 53 1640 
I 53 23 84 

f235 02 16, 235 04 42 
\235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 
1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi- 1 10015, India 



