**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12301 (1988) : Code of practice for establishing and 
operating quality circles [MSD 4 : Management and 
Productivity] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 12301 - 1988 

Indian Standard (ReanirmedMiM) 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ESTABLISHING AND 
OPERATING QUALITY CIRCLES 



UDC 658-562 : 006 76 



© Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

^^ ^ September 1988 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ESTABLISHING AND 
OPERATING QUALITY CIRCLES 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 18 February 1988, 
after the draft finalized by the Quality Control 
and Industrial Statistics Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Executive Committee. 

0.2 The concept and practice of Quality Circles 
have helped in creating motivative, productive 
and participative work groups which contribute 
towards improving overall performance of organi- 
zations. Quality Circle is a small group of people 
doing similar work, meeting voluntarily and 
regularly, to identify and analyze work-related 
quality and other problems, recommending/ 
implementing their solutions themselves. Quality 
Circles are led by a person chosen by circle 
members and are assisted by a facilitator who 
plays a key role in coordinating the Quality Circle 
activities. The Circle leaders and facilitators 
are given suitable training in problem identifica- 
tion, data gathering, sampling, decision analysis, 
human relations and presentation techniques. 
Quality Circles not only improve the quality of 
goods produced but also the working atmosphere 
because it developes people and makes the mem- 
bers feel that they are doing something worth- 



while apart from their routine job and they too 
are participating in the management of the com- 
pany. 

0,3 The theme of Quality Circles is now not 
limited to the improvement of quality only, but 
also has incorporated diverse themes, such as 
productivity, efficiency, cost reduction, design, 
safety and production control. Initially started 
in the manufacturing area, the concept is now 
making inroads into the field of non-manufacturing 
services as well, such as hospitals, banks, educa- 
tional institutions, stores, administration, engi- 
neering, finance and training establishments. 
Looking to the advantages of this concept, the 
Quality C]i,rcles approach has now been adopted 
by several countries in the world. 

0.4 The amazing success in quality and produc- 
tivity through Quality Circles has generated a 
lot of interest in our country also. The Quality 
Circles have been operating in many of our indus- 
tries for quite sometime. It was, therefore, felt 
by the committee that the Quality Circle manual 
may be prepared for ensuring uniformity of met- 
hodology and practices. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides the structure of the 
Quality Circles and also the guidelines for imple- 
menting them. 

2. OBJECTIVES OF QUALITY CIRCLE 
ACTIVITIES 

2.1 For Individuals 

a) to give opportunity to employees to learn 
new techniques for recognition, 

b) to give opportunity to employees to iden- 
tify and solve the problem in their work 
area, 

c) to improve job satisfaction, 

d) to create problem-solving capability, 

e) to build an attitude of problem-prevention, 

f) to develop leadership, 



g) to develop a greater safety awareness, and 
h) to improve inter-person relationship. 

2,2 For Organization 

a) to improve quality and productivity of 
products, 

b) to reduce wastages; 

c) to improve employee motivation; 

d) to inspire more effective team work; 

e) to develop a healthy superior-subordinate 
relationship; 

f) to improve communications within the 
organization; 

g) to promote quahty, safety, cost and work- 
consciousness; and 

h) to develop a complete coherent problem 
solving methodology within the organi- 
zation. ♦ 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



3. QUALITY CIRCLES OPERATION 

3.1 Membership — Ideally, the members of a 
particular Circle come from the same work area 
or who perform similar work so that the problems 
they select are familiar to all of them and it is 
easy to find solutions with their experience and 
knowledge. Alternatively, a Circle may also be 
constituted with members from different coimec- 
ted work areas. In such case, they may look at 
the problem from all angles so that it is easy for 
them to arrive at optimum solutions. Whichever 
may be the formation of a Circle, the membership 
is strictly voluntary. 

3.2 Strength of a Circle — An ideal size of a 
Circle is 5 to 10 members. The size must never 
be so large that each member does not get suffi- 
cient time to participate and contribute in the 
meeting. 

3.3 Number of Circles in a Given Work Area — 

The number of Circles in a given work area may 
be more than one if the response for working in 
Quality Circles is more than 15, but any one 
person cannot be a member of more than one 
Circle. To avoid duplication of activities in the 
sanle work area, good co-ordination should be 
maintained between the leaders of these Circles 
and the facilitator. 

3.4 Quality Circle Meetings — As a thumb rule, 
the meetings should take place once a week and 
each meeting should be for approximately one 
hour. It is preferable to conduct the meetings 
in a separate room in the same work area or very 
close to the work area. Circle meetings may be 
held during or after office/factory hours depend- 
ing on the convenience and discretion of Circle 
members. 

3.5 Working Process — The diagram given in 
the right-hand column graphically depicts the 
steps involved in the working process. 

3.6 Nature of Problems — The following are a 
few examples of areas which can be tackled by 
QC members: 

Production : Productivity improvement, quality 
and Service improvement and reducing 
wastages. 

Engineering : Improvement in attending break- 
down and preventive main- 
tenance, reducing downtime for 
searching of tools, and updating 
drawings. 

Materials : Inventory control, development of 
vendors and codification. 

Quality : Sampling and testing methods, 

Assurance feed-back system, quality im- 
provement studies, field trials, 
and improvement in inspection 
methods. 



Problem identification 
by members 



Suggestion from 
management and 
others, if any 



Problem selection by 
members 



Problem analysis by 
members 



Speciahst's help 
can be taken, if 
required 



Solutions/recommendations 
by members 



Management presentation 
by members 



Review of solutions and resulting 
benefits, recommendations and 
their approval by management 



Implementation of approved 
solutions by members 



General 



Work Envi- 
ronments 



Better customer service, systems 
development/improvement, com- 
munication improvement, con- 
servation in printing and statio- 
nery items, control in usage of 
postal, telephone, transport 
systems, etc. 

Safety and house keeping. 



4. STRUCTURE OF QUALITY CIRCLES 

4.1 Basic Elements — The basic elements which 
constitute the structure of Quality Circles are as 
follows: 

a) Top management, 

b) Steering Committee, 

c) Coordinator, 

d) Facilitators, 

e) Leaders, 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



f) Members, and 

g) Non-members. 

4.2 Top Management — The executives at the 
highest level who extend all the necessary support 
to the activities of the Quality Circles, and through 
their personal presence at the presentations and 
other major activities of Quality Circles make 
their support visible to all. The top management 
has an important role to play to ensure the success 
of implementation of the QC concept in the orga- 
nization. They should be fully convinced and 
committed to Quality Circles. 

4.2,1 Functions 

a) demonstrate unequivocally its understand- 
ing and faith in the concept of Quality 
Circles, 

b) make provision in the annual budget for 
meeting the expenditure of operation of 
Quality Circles, 

c) encourage healthy growth through compe- 
tition between Quality Circles by instituting 
an award to the division/department which 
performs best in propagation of Quality 
Cirlces as well as to the Quality Circles 
which make the best presentations at any 
centrally organized convention or con- 
ference, 

d) give necessary guidance to employees at 
different levels for making the Quality 
Circle movement a self-sustained success, 

e) include propagation of Quality Circles as 
one of the Corporate objectives, 

f) attend management presentation of various 
Circles, 

g) respond to the Circle recommendations in 
a positive way without any delays, 

h) verify the implementation of Circle recom- 
mendations without any undue delays, 

j) depute the members to outside seminars/ 
workshops, and 

k) periodically review the QC activities on a 
regular basis. 

4.3 Steering Committee 

4.3.1 As soon as a decision is made to implement 
Quality Circles programme, the steering committee 
comprismg the chief executive, divisional heads 
of departments and the coordinator is constituted. 
The chief executive and the coordinator act as 
chairman and secretary of the steering committee 
respectively. The meetings are convened at least 
once in two or three months. 

4.3.2 Functions 

a) promote Quality Circles in the Organiza- 
tion; 



b) develop working methodology and give the 
guidelines relating to Quality Circle opera- 
tions with respect to the facilities to be 
provided, for examples, place, date and 
time of conducting the meetings, type of 
rewards for motivation; 

c) establish the programme objectives and 
resources; 

d) provide policy guidelines and direction; 

e) nominate coordinator and facilitators; 

f) attend various presentations of the studies 
carried out by Quality Circles; 

g) take decisions for implementation of re- 
commendations of Quality Circles; 

h) obtain feedback from facilitators and 
review Quality Circles activities; 

j) provide necessary provisions in the annual 
budget; 

k) grade the project reports of Quality Circles 
for awards: and 

m) review the overall working of Quality 
Circles. 

4.4 Coordinator — The coordinator coordinates 
the activities of Quality Circles throughout the 
organization and carries out such functions as 
would make the operation of Quality Circles 
smooth, effective and self-sustained. 

4.4.1 Functions 

a) registers Quality Circles in the unit/division; 

b) has liaison with the facilitators for ensuring 
regularity of Circle meetings, mid-term 
presentations, etc, and to analyze ^activity 
level charts'. 

c) convenes Steering Committee meetings and 
circulate record notes thereof; 

d) convenes monthly leaders' meetings and 
circulate record notes thereof; 

e) organizes systematic documentation of 
Quality Circle case studies and publishes 
their compilation annually; 

f) organizes top-management presentations 
in coordination with the facilitators; 

g) gives assistance to Circles, whenever asked 
for; 

h) conducts opinion surveys to assess intangi- 
ble gains from time to time; 

j) publishes newsletter on Quality Circle acti- 
vities in local language; 

k) prepares training material for facilitators 
and leaders in conjunction with training 
department; ♦ 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



m) organizes training programmes for facili- 
tators and leaders in collaboration with 
training department ; 

n) organizes lectures, seminars, conferences, 
exhibitions, etc, on Quality Circles; 

p) publishes periodicals, pamphlets, etc, for 
the promotion of Quality Circles; 

q) provides display boards of Quality Circles 
in the shops, areas where Quality Circles 
are functioning; 

r) exposes all employees at the grass-roots 
and different levels of executives to the 
concept of Quality Circle through audio- 
visuals and lectures; 

s) disseminates knowledge by circulating in- 
formation and news on Quality Circles 
from journals/books; 

t) developes schemes for the recognition of 
Quality Circles for the contributions made 
by them; 

u) organizes presentations of Quality Circle 
case studies in sister units for mutual ex- 
change of ideas; and 

v) organizes conventions of Quahty Circles. 

4.5 Facilitator — The facilitator is usually a 
senior officer of the department where Quality 
Circles are working and is nominated by the mana- 
gement. He does not only guide the Quality 
Circle activities in his area, but also enthuses others 
to get involved in these activities. Because of the 
crucial role that the facilitator plays in making 
Quality Circles operation a success, his selection 
shall be done carefully. 

4.5.1 Functions 

a) attend Quality Circle meetings, at least for 
brief periods; 

b) guide Circles in the proceedings of meetings, 

c) coordinate with the training officer for 
organizing necessary training programmes 
In SQC techniques, QC working procedures, 
etc, for Quality Circle leaders and members; 

d) provide necessary facilities and act as a 
catalyst for the Circle members; 

e) coordinate and obtain the support and 
assistance from other functional areas 
wherever required by the Quality Circles; 

f) act as intermediary in resolving Quality 
Circle problems; 

g) work closely with the Streering Committee; 

h) ensure that each Quality Circle keeps a 
record of its activities by way of main- 
taining registers, follows up for implemen- 
tation of completed project; 



j) arrange for periodical management pre- 
sentations and to schedule meetings of 
Quality Circles; 

k) communicate the Steering Committee deci- 
sions regarding the implementation of 
recommendations submitted by Quality 
Circles, searches for new ideas and publi- 
cises the programme; 

m) collect and arrange dissemination of litera- 
tures relating to Quality Circle activities 
elsewhere ; 

n) arrange periodical get-together of Circle 
members with the top executives of the 
organization; and 

p) strengthen and promote participative culture 
within the organization. 

4,6 Leader — Leader is chosen by the members 
of a Quality Circle among themselves. Members 
may also themselves decide to have leader by 
rotation. The deputy leader may also be chosen 
by the Quality Circle so as to ensure that Circle 
meetings and other activities would go on unin- 
terruptedly even if the leader is not present. 
Initially the supervisor may be a leader and another 
worker as deputy leader. 

4.6.1 Functions 

a) conduct Circle meetings regularly; 

b) maintain registers regarding the proceed- 
ings of the Circle meetings, problem-selec- 
tions, etc; 

c) train the members with the assistance of the 
facilitator/co-ordinator ; 

d) maintain a high degree of cohesiveness of 
his team with a sense of identity; 

e) involve every member in the Circle meet- 
ings/activities; 

f) set Circle goals and improve performance 
towards the same; 

g) chalk out action plans and delegate res- 
ponsibility to Circle members; 

h) bring about a consensus approach in 
problem solving; 

j) prepare the project report and present to 
the departmental heads and Steering Com- 
mittee ; 

k) appraise the progress of the work with the 
facilitator and the concerned departmental 
head; 

m) interact with other functional areas in 
problem-solving; 

n) review progress vis-a-vis goals and objec- 
tives set for themselves; 

p) arrange for mid-term and top management 
presentations ; and 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



q) catalyze non-members to join existing 
Circles or start new ones. 

4.7 Members — Members are the basic element 
of the structm'e of Quality Circles. Members 
of Quality Circle are a small group of people from 
the same work-area or doing similar type of work, 
who voluntarily form a Quality Cu-cle. Once a 
Circle is formed, they remain as permanent mem- 
bers of the Circle, unless they leave the work-area 
for good. The members should contribute acti- 
vely to the effective functioning of their quality 
Circle, aiming at better performance of their work- 
area in every way on an on-going basis. 

4.7,1 Functions 

a) meet regularly ( one hour in a week ) and 
actively participate in Quality Circle meet- 
ing; 

b) contribute ideas for problem solving; 

c) assist the leader in data gathering, record- 
keeping, interacting with other areas, 

d) catalyze generation of cohesive team work- 
ing in the work-area, 

e) strive for the highest standards of perfor- 
mance of the Circle, 

f) involve in the improvement of the total 
performance of the organization, and 

g) take part in the mid-term and top mana- 
gement presentations. 

4.8 Non-members — Non-members are those who 
are not members of the Quality Circle but may 
be involved in the process of the implementation 
of the Circle recommendations. They are wel- 
come, if they so desire, to form new Circles or 
join existing Circles. They should actively in- 
volve themselves in the implementation of the 
Circle recommendations. 

5. TRAINING 

5.1 The objective of training for Quality Circle 
activities is to prepare the concerned people for 
playing their roles effectively for the successful 
functioning of Quality circles. People are to 
be trained for their specific roles and hence em- 
phasis need to be paid on the role of each involved 
in the Quality Circle function. 

5.2 The success of the Circle activities depends 
on the training received by the concerned people 
in: 

a) proper understanding of the concept and 
philosophy, 

b) translating effectively the philosophy into 
practice, 

c) proper application of simple statistical 
quality control techniques, 



d) improving communication capability, and 

e) developing leadership qualities and build- 
ing up individuals. 

5.3 Training is primarily given to facilitators and 
leaders who, in turn, will have to train Circle 
members. The training requirements for facili- 
tator and leader are given in 5.3.1 and 5.3.2. 

5.3.1 For the facilitator, the stress is laid on: 

a) reinforcing Circle leader's skills, 

b) improving the Circle leader's performance, 

c) catalyzing Circle activities, 

d) strengthening and promoting participative 
culture, 

e) using simple techniques in problem solving, 
and 

f) identifying likely problems/pitfalls and 
guarding against them. 

5.3.2 For the leader, the stress is laid on: 

a) leadership role, 

b) group techniques, 

c) communication, 

d) goals setting, 

e) application of techniques, and 

f) effective conduct of meetings. 

5.4 Training Modules 

5.4.1 For Facilitator 

a) Quality Circle — its genesis, concept and 
philosophy; 

b) role of facilitator, functions of leaders, 
members and steering committee; 

c) quality control techniques used in Quality 
Circle activities; and 

d) problems encountered by Quality Circles 
and their solutions. 

5.4.2 For Leader 

a) introduction of Quality Circles; 

b) identification of problems — brain stor- 
ming, 

c) selection of the priorities — pareto analysis, 

d) identification of the causes for the prob- 
lems — cause and effect diagram, 

e) collection and presentation of data, 

f) identification of the solutions and selecting 
the best — brain storming and cost benefit 
analysis, 

g) delegation of responsibility, 
h) effective conduct of meetings, 

j) record keeping and follow-up action, 
k) review of progress against goals, and 
m) management presentations. 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



5.5 The most commonly techniques, such as are plotted using vertical bar charts. A model 
brain storming, pareto diagram, cause and effect of a Pareto diagram is given below: 
diagram used in Quality Circle activities are ex- 
plained in 5.5,1 to 5.5,3. 



5.5.1 Brain Storming — Brain Storming is a 
group participation technique used by members 
of Quality Circles right from selection of a pro- 
blem to identification of all possible causes of a 
problem. For effective brain storming, the 
following rules may be followed: 

a) no criticism of any ideas, 

b) encourage free-wheeling, 

c) equal opportunity to all members, 

d) all ideas should be recorded, and 

e) selection of the best idea after thorough 
scrutiny. 

5.5.2 Pareto Diagram — Pareto Diagram is a 
decision-making tool, which helps in the identi- 
fication of the 'vital few' from the 'trivial many' 
at a glance when incidents of various problems 



A e C E 

OEFECT 

5.5.2.1 For further details, reference may 
be made to Indian Standard on Pareto diagram 
and cause-and-effect diagram ( under preparation ). 

5.5,3 Cause-and'Ejfect Diagram — This is 
the next step after 'brain storming', in [analyzing 
a problem in detail. It is composed of lines 
and symbols, representing a meaningful relation- 
ship between an effect and its causes. A model 
cause-and-effect diagram is given below: 



MEN 




METHOD 



MATERIAL 





EFFECT 



MACHINES 



CAUSES 



IS : 12301 - 1988 



5.5.3,1 For further details, reference may be 
made to Indian Standard on Pareto diagram and 
Cause-and-Effect diagram ( under preparation ). 

6. MANAGEMENT PRESENTATION 

6.1 A management presentation is a meeting in 
which the leader and his Circle members explain 
the methodology and the solutions they have 
arrived at, to solve a problem in their work-area, 
to the Steering Committee. The participants 
make the presentation with the help of charts, 
graphs, etc, prepared by themselves. This event 
represents a most exciting form of participation/ 
communication and recognition to all. 

6.2 The management presentation is important 
as it shows completed project and make recom- 
mendations. Management presentation also pro- 
mote communication. The Circle gains recogni- 
tion for its contributions. Morale of the mem- 
bers is boosted by the periodic opportunities to 
deal directly with the management. 

7. LAUNCHING OF QUALITY ORCLES 

7.1 The management interested in introducing 
Quality Circles in its organization shall in the 
first instance commit itself to concept of Com- 
pany-Wide Quality Control (CWQC) or Total 
Quality Control ( TQC ) involving development 
of management attitudes and practices oriented 
towards defect-free operation in the organiza- 
tion. The management shall take necessary 
steps to initiate massive training and orientation 
programmes starting with top management, to 
develop and adopt scientific quality systems and 
methods. These programmes should enable 
the management to look into and correct mana- 
gement controllable deficiencies. Subsequently 
and at an appropriate time, as may be decided 
by the management, the introduction of Quality 
Circles in the organization shall generally follow 
the sequence of steps given below: 



a) detaited discussions among the top and 
middle management personnel; 

b) training programmes for the different levels 
of employees on the concept and working 
methodology of Quality Circles and circu- 
lation of literature; 

c) study the response during discussion with 
workers, staff and officers whether majority 
are favourable for launching Quality Cir- 
cles; 

d) once the response is positive, form a Steer- 
ing Committee with chief executive as 
chairman and divisional managers as the 
members ; 

e) select the coordinator, who will also act 
as secretary of the Steering Committee; 

f) train the coordinator in all aspects; 

g) ask the coordinator to prepare a report 
on working methodology which is suitable 
to the organization; 

j) identify the potential departments from 
which t\\Q members have given their willing- 
ness to start Quality Circle activities; 

k) launch pilot Circles ( 2 or 3 ) in the poten- 
tial departments; 

m) train thoroughly the members of these 
pilot Circles in working methodology, 
roles of leaders, members and SQC tech- 
niques, etc; 

n) closely follow the working of pilot Circles; 
and 

p) after successful working of the pilot Circles 
for a reasonable period of 3-4 months, 
extented the concept to other departments. 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones: 3310131, 3311375 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to ail offices) 



Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 3310131, 3311375 

♦Eastern: 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 362499 

Northern: SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 21S43, 31641 

Southern: C.I.T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 412442, 412519, 412916 

tWestern: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 6329295 

Branch Offices: 

Tushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 26348,26349 
Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 384955, 384956 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 66716 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53627 

53/5 Ward No.29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 — 

5'S-56C L.N. Gupta Marg (Nampally Station Road), HYDERABAD 500001 221083 

RI4 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 63471, 69832 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 216876, 218292 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 62305 

T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palayam, TRJVANDRUM 695035 62104, 62117 

Inspection Offices (With Sale Point): 

Pushpanjali, First Floor, 250A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar 

Square, NAGPUR 440010 25171 

Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivajj Nagar, PUNE 411005 52435 



*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 276800 

fSales OflSce in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Bombay 400097 896528 



Printed at Central Electric P^ess, Delhi-1 10007 



