**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  14653  (1999) :  Information  Technology  -  Guideline  for  the 
Evaluation  and  Selection  of  Case  Tools  [LITD  14:  Software 
and  System  Engineering] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102: 1995 

( Reaffirmed  2003 ) 

Indian  Standard 

INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY  —  GUIDELINE 

FOR  THE  EVALUATION  AND  SELECTION 

OF  CASE  TOOLS 


ICS  35.080 


©  BIS  1999 
BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHA  VAN,  9  B  AH  ADUR  SHAH  Z  AF  AR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

January  1999  Price  Group  15 


Software  Systems,  Languages  and  Methodologies  Sectional  Committee,  LTD  33 


NAnONAL  FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  which  is  identical  with  ISO/IEC  14 102  :  1995  'Information  technology  —  Guideline  for  the 
evaluation  and  selection  of  CASE  tools',  issued  jointly  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO) 
and  International  Electrotechnical  Commission  (lEC),  was  adpoted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  the 
reconmiendation  of  Software  Systems,  Languages  and  Methodologies  Sectional  Committee  (LTD  33)  and  approval 
of  the  Electronics  and  Teleconununication  Division  Council. 

The  text  of  the  ISO/IEC  standard  has  been  approved  as  suitable  for  publication  as  Indian  Standard  without  deviations. 
Certain  conventions  are,  however,  not  identical  to  those  used  in  Indian  Standards.  Attention  is  particularly  drawn 
to  the  following: 

Wherever  the  words  'International  Standard'  appear  referring  to  this  standard,  they  should  be  read  as 
'Indian  Standard*. 

CROSS  REFERENCES 

The  concerned  technical  committee  has  reviewed  the  provisions  of  the  following  standards  referred  in  this  adpoted 
standard  and  has  decided  that  these  are  acceptable  for  use  in  conjunction  with  this  standard: 

ISO  5807 :  1985  Information  processing  —  Documentation  symbols  and  conventions  for  data,  program 

and  system  flowcharts,  program  network  charts  and  system  resources  charts 

ISO/IEC  121 19 :  1994  Information  technology  —  Software  packages  —  Quality  requirements  and  testing 

ISO/IEC  12207 :  1995  Information  technology  —  Software  life  cycle  processes 

ISO/IEC  9126 :  1991    Information  technology  —  Software  product  evaluation  —  C^ality  characteristics 
and  guidelines  for  their  use 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


Contents 


1  Scope 5 

2  Normative  references 7 

3  Definitions  and  acronyms  8 

3.1  Definitions 8 

3.2  Acronyms 9 

4  Overview  of  evaluation  and  selection  of  CASE  tools lo 

4.1  Initiation  process 10 

4.2  Structuring  process    11 

4.3  Evaluation  process 11 

4.4  Selection  process 12 

4.5  General  process  considerations 12 

4.5.1  Sequencing  of  processes 12 

4.5.2  Reducing  cost  and  risk  . 13 

5  Initiation  process  . 14 

5.1  Goal  setting 14 

5.2  Establishing  selection  criteria   15 

5.3  Project  planning  and  control 16 

6  Structuring  process .  17 

6.1  Requirements  definition 17 

6.1.1  Organizational  information  gathering 17 

6.1.2  Requirements  identification 18 

6.1.3  Requirements  structuring 19 

6.2  CASE  tool  information  gathering 20 

6.3  Identifying  final  candidate  CASE  tools 20 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 


7  Evaluation  process 22 

7.1  Preparing  for  evaluation   22 

7.2  Evaluating  CASE  tools 23 

7.2.1  Measurement    23 

7.2.2  Rating 24 

7.2.3  Assessment    24 

7.3  Evaluation  reporting 25 

8  Selection  process 27 

8.1  Preparing  for  selection 27 

8.2  Applying  the  selection  algorithm 27 

8.3  Recommending  a  selection  decision 28 

8.4  Validating  the  selection  decision 28 

9  CASE  tool  characteristics  . .   29 

9.1  Functionality  -  characteristics  related  to  life-cycle  processes.   29 

9.1.1  Characteristic:  Management  Process 30 

9.1.2  Characteristic:  Development  Process 30 

9.1.2.1  Subcharacteristic:  Modeling 31 

9.1.2.2  Subcharacteristic:  Construction  .  .  .  . :  33 

9.1.3  Characteristic:  Maintenance  Process 34 

9.1.4  Characteristic:  Documentation  Process 35 

9.1.5  Characteristic:  Configuration  Management  Process  35 

9.1.6  Characteristic:  Quality  Assurance  Process 36 

9.1.7  Characteristic:  Verification  Process 37 

9.1.8  Characteristic:  Validation  Process 38 

9.2  Functionality  -  characteristics  related  to  CASE  tool  usage.  .  40 

9.2.1  Characteristic:  Environment  in  which  the  CASE  tool 
operates 40 

9.2.2  Characteristic:  CASE  tool  integrability 41 

9.2.3  Characteristic:  Aspects  of  the  CASE  tooFs  application:43 

9.3  General  quality  characteristics 44 

9.3.1  Characteristic:  Functionality 44 

9.3.2  Characteristic:  Reliability 45 

9.3.3  Characteristic:  Usability 45 

9.3.4  Characteristic:  Efficiency 47 

9.3.5  Characteristic:  Maintainability 48 

9.3.6  Characteristic:  Portability 48 

9.4  General  characteristics  not  related  to  quality 49 

9.4.1     Characteristic:  Acquisition    49 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/XEC  14102 :  1995 


9.4.2  Characteristic:  Implementation 50 

9.4.3  Characteristic:  Support  Indicators   ^0 

9.4.4  Characteristic:  Evaluation  or  Certification 51 


Annex  A  Considerations  on  the  use  of  this  International 

Standard 52 

Annex  B  Examples  of  selection  algorithms 54 

Annex  C  Bibliography 59 


As  in  the  Original  Standard,  this  Page  is  Intentionally  Left  Blank 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


Indian  Standard 

INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY  —  GUIDELINE 

FOR  THE  EVALUATION  AND  SELECTION 

OF  CASE  TOOLS 


1        Scope 

This  International  Standard  deals  with  the  evaluation  and  selection  of  CASE  tools, 
covering  a  partial  or  full  portion  of  the  software  engineering  life  cycle.  It 
establishes  processes  and  activities  to  be  applied  for  the  evaluation  of  CASE  tools 
and  selecting  the  most  appropriate  CASE  tools  from  several  candidates.  These 
processes  are  generic,  and  organizations  must  tailor  them  to  meet  organizational 
needs.  The  CASE  tool  evaluation  and  selection  processes  should  be  viewed  in  the 
larger  context  of  the  organization's  technology  adoption  process. 

This  International  Standard  pro\ddes: 

a.  Guidance  on  identifying  organizational  requirements  for  CASE  tools. 

b.  Guidance  on  mapping  those  requirements  to  CASE  tool  characteristics  to 
be  evaluated. 

c.  A  process  for  selecting  the  most  appropriate  CASE  tool  frorn  several  tools, 
based  on  measurements  of  the  defined  characteristics. 

Primary  users  of  this  International  Standard  are  organizations  that  intend  to  adopt 
CASE  tools  to  support  their  software  life  cycle  processes.  CASE  tool  suppliers 
may  also  use  this  International  Standard  to  describe  characteristics  of  their  CASE 
tools. 

This  International  Standard  is  not  intended  to  apply  to: 

a.  Software  engineering  frameworks  whose  purpose  is  to  provide  mechanisms 

for  data,  control  and  presentation  integration. 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

b.  General  purpose  tools  (e.g.,  word  processors,  spreadsheets)  which  may  be 
used  in  software  engineering  activities,  nor  CASE  tools  of  very  narrow 
scope  or  specific  purpose  (e.g.,  a  compiler). 

c.  Planning  for  the  implementation  of  CASE  tools  within  an  organization 
(even  though  it  is  recognized  that  this  is  an  important  subject), 

NOTE  -  A  user  of  this  International  Standard  may  make  the  best  possible  selection  of  a  CASE 
tool  and  have  no  guarantee  of  a  successful  implementation.  ISO/IEC  JTC 1  SC7  WG4  is  working  on  a 
draft  technical  report.  Adoption  of  CASE  Tools,  which  addresses  this  subject. 

This  International  Standard  contains  a  set  of  processes,  activities,  and  tasks 
designed  to  be  tailored.  The  tailoring  process  is  the  selection  of  applicable 
processes,  activities  and  tasks. 

Compliance  with  this  International  Standard  is  defined  as  the  performance  of  the 
processes,  activities,  and  tasks  selected  from  this  International  Standard  for  the 
evaluation  and  selection  project.  Any  organization  imposing  this  International 
Standard  as  a  condition  of  trade  is  responsible  for  specifying  the  minimum  set  of 
required  processes,  activities,  and  tasks  which  constitute  compliance  for  a  given 
application  of  this  International  Standard.  Defining  and  documenting  that 
specification  forms  part  of  the  initiation  process  (clause  5). 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


Normative  references 


The  following  standards  contain  provisions  which,  through  reference  in  this  text, 
constitute  provisions  of  this  International  Standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the 
editions  indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to  revision,  and  parties  to 
agreement  based  upon  this  International  Standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate 
the  possibility  of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standards  indicated 
below.  Members  of  ffiC  and  ISO  maintain  registers  of  currently  valid  International 
Standards. 

ISO  5807: 1985,  Information  processing  -  Documentation  symbols  and 
conventions  for  data,  pro-am  and  system  flowcharts,  program  network  charts 
and  system  resources  charts. 

ISO/EEC  12 119: 1994,  Information  technology  -  Software  packages  -  Quality 
requirements  and  testing. 

ISO/IEC  12207: 1995,  Information  technology  -  Software  life  cycle  processes. 

ISO/IEC  9126: 1991,  Information  technology  -  Software  product  evaluation  - 
Quality  characteristics  and  guidelines  for  their  use. 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

3        Definitions  and  acronyms 
3.1       Definitions 

For  the  purposes  of  this  International  Standard,  the  following  definitions  apply. 

3.1.1  assessment:  An  action  of  applying  specific  documented  criteria  to  a 
specific  software  module,  package  or  product  for  the  purpose  of  determining 
acceptance  or  release  of  the  software  module,  package  or  product.  (ISO/EC 
9126:1991) 

3.1.2  atomic  subcharacteristic:        The  highest  level  evaluation  categories  are 
called  characteristics.  Characteristics  are  usually  subdivided  into 
subcharacteristics.  Many  subcharacteristics  may  be  fiirther  subdivided  into  lower 
level  subcharacteristics.  At  the  lowest-level,  when  no  fiirther  subdivision  is 
appropriate,  the  subcharacteristics  are  referred  to  as  atomic  subcharacteristics. 

3.1.3  CASE  tool:        A  software  product  that  can  assist  software  engineers  by 
providing  automated  support  for  software  life-cycle  activities  as  defined  in 
ISO/IEC  12207:1995. 

NOTES 

1  -  A  CASE  tool  may  provide  support  in  only  selected  functional  areas  or  in  a  wide  variety  of  functional 
areas. 

2  -  CASE  tools  may  be  used  in  several  modes: 

•  As  stand  alone  tools;  in  this  case,  only  compatibility  with  environment  elements  should  be 
addressed. 

•  In  small  groups  which  communicate  directly  with  one  another;  it  may  be  supposed  that 
integration  is  predefined,  perhaps  proprietorily. 

•  In  the  presence  of  a  larger  framework  of  the  SEE;  in  this  case  the  ability  of  the  tool  to  use  the 
relevant  services  of  the  framework  should  be  addressed. 

3.1.4  characteristic:  An  aspect  of  a  product  by  which  it  can  be  described  and 
evaluated.  A  characteristic  may  be  refined  into  multiple  levels  of  subcharacteristics 
that  bear  on  its  ability  to  satisfy  stated  or  implied  needs. 

3.1.5  measurement:   The  action  of  applying  a  software  quality  metric  to  a 
specific  software  product,  (ISO/IEC  9126:1991) 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

NOTES 

1  -  Measurement  can  apply  to  metrics  other  than  software  quaUty  metrics. 

2  -  An  object  may  be  measured  directly,  or  may  be  measured  indirectly  by  the  application  of  metrics  to 
information  about  or  representations  of  the  object, 

3.1.6  metric:  A  quantitative  scale  and  method  which  can  be  used  to  detennine  the 
value  a  subcharacteristic  takes  for  a  specific  software  product. 

3.1.7  rating:  The  action  of  mapping  the  measured  value  to  the  appropriate  rating 
level.  Used  to  determine  the  rating  level  associated  with  the  software  for  a  specific 
quality  characteristic.  (ISO/IEC  9126:1991) 

NOTE  -  Rating  and  rating  levels  can  be  applied  to  characteristics  other  than  quality  characteristics. 

3.1.8  rating  level:       A  range  of  values  on  a  scale  to  allow  software  to  be 
classified  (rated)  in  accordance  with  the  stated  or  implied  needs.  Appropriate 
rating  levels  may  be  associated  with  the  different  views  of  quality,  i.e.,  users, 
managers  or  developers.  These  levels  are  called  rating  levels.  (ISO/IEC 
9126:1991) 

3.1.9  Software  Engineering  Environment:  The  software  engineering 
environment  (SEE)  is  that  portion  of  the  system  which  provides  automated 
support  for  the  engineering  of  software  systems  and  the  management  of  the 
software  process.  It  includes  platform,  system  software,  utilities,  and  CASE  tools 
installed. 

NOTE  -  The  SEE  architecture  has  two  aspects: 

•  the  CASE  tools  which  provide  facilities  for  supporting  life-cycle  processes,  and 

•  a  general  framework  which  provides  a  set  of  capabilities  that  offer  common  services  used  by 
the  tools. 

3.2       Acronyms 

BMT  Bench  Mark  Test 

CASE  Computer  Aided  Software  Engineering 

GUI  Graphical  User  Interface 

SEE  Software  Engineering  Environment 

SQL  Structured  Query  Language 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

4        Overview  of  evaluation  and  selection  of  CASE  tools 

This  section  provides  an  overview  of  the  evaluation  and  selection  of  CASE  tools 
discussed  in  this  International  Standard  as  shown  in  Figure  1.  Evaluation  and 
selection  of  CASE  tools  includes  four  major  processes: 

Initiation  Process 
Structuring  Process 
Evaluation  Process 
Selection  Process 


Pro|ecr 


L«vtl 
GmU 


SdcctkiA 
Critcrta 


|Stnict»rfag^ 


I 1  I 


m3> 


Evakial 
ibport 


!1J 


F^ 


PmomflDw 

< 


Figure  1  -  Overview  of  evaluation  and 
selection  of  CASE  tools 


A  key  process  is  the  structuring  of  a  set  of  requirements  against  which  candidate 
CASE  tools  are  to  be  evaluated,  and  upon  which  selection  decisions  will  be  based. 
The  CASE  tool  characteristics  defined  in  clause  9  form  the  basis  for  requirements 
structuring,  and  play  a  central  role  in  the  overall  process. 

4.1       Initiation  process 

The  purpose  of  the  initiation  process  is  to  define  the  general  objectives  and 
requirements  of  the  intended  evaluation  and  selection  of  CASE  tools,  to  establish  the 
high  level  direction,  and  to  define  the  management  aspects  of  the  effort  (e.g., 
schedule,  resources,  cost). 

The  initiation  process,  discussed  in  detail  in  clause  5,  is  composed  of  three  activities: 

•  goal  setting:  provides  the  rationale  and  general  policy  for  evaluation  and 


10 


IS  14653 :  1999 
KO/ffiC  14102 :  1995 


selection. 


•  establishing  sdection  criteria:  provides  criteria  to  be  used  in  the  subsequent 
selection  process. 

•  project  planning:  results  in  a  plan  which  includes  generic  planning 
information  and  also  information  which  defines  the  structure  of  the  evaluation  and 
selection  effort. 

4.2  Structuring  process 

The  purpose  of  the  structuring  process  is  to  elaborate  a  set  of  stmaured 
requirements,  based  upon  the  CASE  tool  characteristics  of  clause  9  against  which 
CASE  tools  should  be  evaluated,  and  to  obtsun  the  necessary  information  on  CASE 
tools  to  permit  evaluation.  It  is  assumed  that  a  set  of  general  organizational 
information  and  guidelines  is  available  to  be  used  as  inputs. 

The  structuring  process,  discussed  in  detail  in  clause  6,  is  composed  of  three 
activities: 

•  requirements  analysis:  transforms  organizational  needs  into  measurable 
structures. 

•  CASE  tool  information  gathering:  captures  a  snapshot  of  the  current  state- 
of-the-art  in  CASE  tools. 

•  identifying  final  candidate  CASE  tools:  candidate  CASE  tools  are  identified 
for  evaluation  using  the  results  of  the  last  two  activities. 

NOTE  -  During  the  evaluation,  requirements  may  require  revision.  If  this  occurs,  some  repetition  of 
activities  of  this,  and  subsequent  processes  may  be  necessary. 

4.3  Evaluation  process 

The  purpose  of  the  evaluation  process  is  to  produce  technical  evaluation  reports  that 
will  be  the  major  input  for  the  selection  process.  Each  evaluation  process  results  in 
a  profile  of  the  quality  and  other  characteristics  of  the  tool  which  was  evaluated. 
Comparisons  between  tools  are  not  made  as  part  of  this  process. 

The  evaluation  process,  discussed  in  detail  in  clause  7,  is  composed  of  three  activities: 

•  preparation  for  evaluation:  fmalization  of  the  various  details  of  the 

11 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

evaluation  (eg,,  scenario,  subcharacteristics,  metrics,  tool  characteristics)  in  an 
evaluation  plan. 

•  evaluating  CASE  tools:  measurement,  rating  and  assessment. 

•  evaluation  reporting:  an  evaluation  report  is  prepared  which  provides  the 
resuhs  of  the  evaluation  for  each  CASE  tool  considered. 

4.4  Selection  process 

The  purpose  of  the  selection  process  is  to  identify  the  most  suitable  CASE  tool(s) 
among  the  candidate  tools,  and  to  ensure  that  the  recommended  tool(s)  meets  the 
original  goals.  The  selection  process  compares  the  results  of  the  evaluations  of  the 
candidate  tools  to  determine  which  is  the  most  appropriate  for  selection. 

The  selection  process,  discussed  in  clause  8,  is  composed  of  four  activities: 

•  preparing  for  selection:  the  selection  criteria  are  finalized  and  the  selection 
algorithm  is  defined. 

•  assessing  the  evaluation  results:  the  selection  algorithm  is  applied  to  the 

evaluation  results. 

•  recommending  a  selection  decision:  the  best  of  the  candidates  is  determined. 

•  validating  the  selection  decision:  the  recommended  selection  is  validated 
against  the  original  goals. 

4.5  General  process  considerations 

There  are  several  considerations  that  apply  to  the  processes  described  in  this 
International  Standard  on  a  global  basis.  The  intent  is  for  the  user  of  this  International 
Standard  to  tailor  its  application  in  such  a  way  as  to  maximize  the  probability  of  a 
successfiil  evaluation  and  selection  process,  and  minimize  its  cost  and  risk. 

4.5.1     Sequencing  of  processes 

This  International  Standard  does  not  impose  the  sequence  of  process  activities 
described  above  and  in  the  following  sections.  It  is  up  to  the  organization  to  select 
the  relevant  processes  and  activities  needed  to  meet  its  evaluation  and  selection  goals. 
The  organization  will  decide  which  to  employ,  in  what  sequence,  and  with  what 


12 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

degree  of  parallelism.  The  sequencing  of  the  processes'  activities  is  then  documented 
in  the  project  plan  developed  during  the  initiation  process. 

4.5.2    Reducing  cost  and  risk 

In  general,  organizations  which  apply  this  International  Standard  will  want  to 
minimize  the  cost  of  the  entire  evaluation  and  selection  process  to  the  extent  possible, 
while  maintaining  the  level  of  effort  necessary  to  select  the  most  appropriate  CASE 
tool(s)  for  their  use.  These  objectives  may  be  addressed  by  minimizing  the  number  of 
tools  evaluated,  minimising  the  cost  of  evaluating  specific  tools,  and  ensuring  that  the 
formality  of  the  process  is  appropriate  to  the  organization. 

The  activities  of  CASE  tool  information  gathering  and  identifying  final 
candidates  for  selection  (see  clause  6)  effectively  allow  the  user  of  this  International 
Standard  to  screen  the  available  tools  against  the  organization's  needs,  and  eliminate 
from  consideration  tools  which  do  not,  or  are  not  likely  to,  substantially  address  the 
organization's  needs. 

NOTE  I  -  It  may  be  that  the  organization  is  unable  to  find  any  tool  which  appear  likely  to 
sufficiently  meet  its  needs.  In  such  a  case,  the  stated  needs  themselves  should  be  re-examined,  and  if  they 
are  found  to  accurately  reflect  the  organization's  actual  requirements  for  technology  improvement,  the 
overall  evaluation  and  selection  process  may  be  abandoned.  Similarly,  if  the  final  candidate  tools  appear 
to  be  marginal  in  addressing  the  organization's  needs,  the  level  of  detail  and  fonnality  of  the  subsequent 
activities  should  be  made  to  reflect  the  risk  factor,  and  the  organization  should  be  prepared  to  not  select  a 
tool  if  the  evaluation  process  so  indicates,  as  the  typical  cost  of  bringing  a  new  tool  into  operational  use  is 
substantial. 

Evaluations  of  candidate  tools  may  have  already  been  performed  and  be 
available  to  the  organization.  Such  information  may  be  used  to  reduce  the  cost  of 
candidate  tool  evaluation. 

NOTE  2  -  Previous  evaluations  which  have  been  performed  on  a  different  version  of  the  candidate 
tool  may  still  yield  useful  information.  Similarly,  evaluations  which  addressed  a  different  set  of 
organizational  needs  may  still  provide  useful  information. 

This  International  Standard  calls  for  the  development  of  several  plans  and 
reports,  and  implicitly,  for  their  review  by  various  personnel  within  the  organization. 
In  addition,  activities  are  required  to  perform  the  four  processes  outlined.  The  format 
and  level  of  detail  of  the  data  products  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  organization,  as 
is  the  level  of  effort  necessary  to  perform  the  activities. 

NOTE  3  -  Some  organizations  may  need  to  limit  the  scope,  detail  and  formality  of  the  processes 
to  apply  this  International  Standard  within  existing  resource  constraints. 


13 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

5        Initiation  process 

The  evaluation  and  selection  processes  require  the  agreement  of  management.  In  line 
with  this  agreement,  a  set  of  goals  for  the  introduction  (or  enhancement)  of  CASE 
technology  will  be  established.  A  set  of  CASE  tool  selection  guidelines  will  be 
identified  and  a  project  plan  developed.  The  process  is  shown  in  Figure  2. 


Gad 
IMtat 

:>^ 

\ 

_ 

\ 

■■■< 

^ 

Eitoblbhtag 
StUcUoa 
CritM-to 

\ 

Lwtl 
GMb 

^       :       " 

y        li 

U(>K 

\ 

. 

r 

\// 

...••• 

CrlUria 

1  — 1 

\  ^^ 

/ 

FrodNct 

"    Project 
Pl.ii.iag 
awl  Coatrol 

> 

-^ 

bi. 

P 

Proiact 
Plaa 

racrM  nm 

^, 

Daunnv 

5.1 


Figure  2  -  Overview  of  initiation  process 
Goal  setting 


The  development  of  a  set  of  realistic  goals  is  a  necessary  first  activity.  In  developing 
goals,  both  a  rationale  for  acquisition  (why  acquire  a  CASE  tool)  and  a  general  policy 
for  acquisition  (what  type  of  tool  to  acquire  and  how  to  do  it)  should  be  developed. 

NOTE  -  Goal  setting  activities,  including  possibly  the  identification  of  selection  criteria,  may  have  already 
been  performed  as  a  part  of  other  efforts  prior  to  formally  entering  the  initiation  process  of  evaluation  and 
selection  of  CASE  tools. 

The  following  tasks  should  be  performed: 

Develop  rationale  for  acquisition: 

Review  the  organization's  current  software  development  process,  determining 
its  maturity  and  areas  of  concern. 

Review  the  current  state  of  CASE  technology  and  observe  trends  for 
consideration  as  future  reference  technology. 

Compare  the  organization's  current  practices  to  possible  future  practices  if 


14 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

CASE  tools  are  adopted  and  identify  areas  of  potential  benefit. 

Identify  probable  impacts  of  CASE  tools  on  the  organization;  e.g.,  areas 
where  training  and  education,  procedure  guides,  and  technical  support  are  needed  to 
effectively  deploy  CASE  technology. 

Define  goals  and  expectations: 

Set  overall  goals  (eg.,  productivity  improvement,  quality  improvement, 
enhanced  process  manageability). 

Define  evaluation  and  selection  constraints  (e.g.,cost,  schedule,  resources). 

Quantify  and  classify  expectations  (based  upon  goals). 

Set  general  policy  for  acquisition: 

Identify  constraints  on  tool  acquisition  (e.g.,  implementation  cost,  schedule, 
other  resources). 

Develop  alternate  approaches  to  introducing/augmenting  CASE  technology 
(e.g.,  buy  a  tool,  modify  an  existing  tool,  develop  a  new  tool). 

Assess  the  feasibility  of  the  various  alternatives  in  light  of  organizational 
readiness,  technical  considerations,  performance  specifications,  and  resources. 

The  goals  and  expectations  established  here  will  be  used  to  guide  subsequent  activities 
in  the  overall  process  and,  finally,  to  validate  the  selection  decision. 

5.2       Establishing  selection  criteria 

Based  upon  the  goals  and  expectations  developed  above,  selection  criteria  should  be 
established: 

Decompose  the  high  level  goals  into  a  set  of  selection  criteria  to  make  the 
(go/no  go)  selection  decision, 

NOTE  1  -  The  selection  criteria  should  be  objective  and  quantitative.  Each  selection  criterion 
should  include  some  defined  threshold  specified  on  which  the  major  go/no  go  decision  will  be  made  during 
selection. 

Define  the  relative  importance  of  the  selection  criteria. 

15 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

NOTE  2  -  The  relative  importance  of  the  selection  criteria  will  be  used  to  determine  the  weights 
assigned  to  tool  characteristics  and  subcharactehstics  for  evaluation. 

Define  the  level  of  detail  and  the  nature  of  the  evaluation  activities  to  be 
performed. 

NOTE  3  -  The  nature  of  the  evaluation  activities  covers  the  methods  used  in  collecting  the  data. 
Reference,  for  example,  how  the  data  are  measured,  collected  with  predefined  criteria,  or  based  upon 
subjective  observation. 

Define  the  evaluation/selection  scenario  to  be  performed  (see  Annex  A). 

5.3       Project  planning  and  control 

Based  upon  the  goals  and  selection  criteria  which  have  been  established  for  the  overall 
evaluation  and  selection  process,  a  project  plan  should  be  created  and  a  control 
mechanism  implemented.  The  plan  and  control  mechanism  should  be  developed  in 
accordance  with  the  organization's  normal  planning  and  control  process,  and  it  should 
contain  the  following: 

A  project  team  organization  with  assigned  responsibilities. 

NOTE  -  The  skill  of  the  evaluators  will  have  an  impact  on  the  results  of  the  evaluation  and  its 
applicability  to  the  organization.  The  evaluation  personnel  should  be  selected  with  this  in  mind,  and  the 
skill  level  of  evaluators  should  be  a  factor  in  assessing  evaluation  results.  The  evaluation  team  should  be 
representative  of  the  intended  tool  user  group. 

A  set  of  operational  goals  obtained  by  decomposing  the  overall  goals 
previously  established. 

A  set  of  selection  guidelines:  weighted  selection  criteria,  definition  of  level  of 
detail  and  nature,  and  an  evaluation  and  selection  scenario  (see  Annex  A). 

A  schedule  of  activities  and  their  tasks,  along  with  an  estimate  of  resource 
requirements  and  a  cost  estimate. 

A  means  of  monitoring  and  controlling  the  execution  of  the  plan. 

If  developed,  the  project  plan  and  control  mechanism  should  be  updated  as  the  project 
evolves. 


16 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 


Structuring  process 


The  structuring  of  the  evaluation  and  selection  activities  can  begin  when  a  set  of  high 
level  goals,  selection  guidelines,  and  a  project  plan  are  in  place.  The  structuring 
process  begins  with  a  requirements  definition  activity  which  is  followed  by  two 
parallel  activities:  the  gathering  of  information  on  existing  CASE  tools,  and  the 
preparation  of  a  list  of  candidate  CASE  tools  to  be  evaluated. 

The  organization  of  CASE  tool  requirements  will  follow  the  four  groups  of  CASE 
tool  characteristics  as  outlined  in  clause  9.  The  major  activities  are  shown  in  Figure 
3. 


Requiren 


Strvcturtd  ' 
ents 


IdtnUfytng 
Filial  CaRdidatc 
CASK  Tool! 


y 


f  CASE  Tori 
■fOTMaUON 
Gatktrtag 


^    CaMlldalct    | 


[^] 


6.1 


Figure  3  -  Overview  of  structuring  process 
Requirements  deflnition 


During  requirements  definition,  the  requirements  for  the  CASE  tool  are  collected  and 
organized  into  the  CASE  tool  characteristics  as  noted  in  clause  9.  9. 1  and  9.2  identify 
the  major  CASE  specific  characteristics;  9.3  identifies  general  software  quality 
characteristics,  and  9.4  identifies  a  set  of  characteristics  not  related  to  quality.  A 
comprehensive  set  of  requirements  is  necessary  to  select  the  most  appropriate  CASE 
tool,  and  the  structuring  process  provides  for  greater  ease  and  repeatability  in  the 
evaluation  process.  Three  activities  are  required. 

6.1.1     Organizational  information  gathering 

To  be  able  to  define  a  set  of  detailed  requirements  to  be  satisfied  by  the  CASE  tool, 
information  about  the  organization  should  be  gathered,  including: 


17 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

Willingness  of  the  organization  to  fully  fund  and  implement  CASE  tool  use. 

Current  software  engineering  environment  within  the  organization,  including 
data  describing  current  hardware,  operating  software,  and  tool  use. 

Types  of  software  development  projects  undertaken  by  the  organization 
include  size,  domain  of  application. 

Characteristics  and  constraints  of  the  target  systems  for  which  software  is 
developed. 

Specific  expected  impacts  and  improvements  of  CASE  technology  on  the 
organization. 

Requirements  from  potential  tool  users  and  end  users. 

Current  organizational  procurement  policies. 

This  information  is  necessary  to  ensure  the  tool  or  tools  are  appropriate  for  use  within 
the  organization,  they  address  organizational  needs,  and  needs  perceived  by  their 
future  users. 

NOTE  -  This  infonnation  can  be  gathered  in  a  number  of  ways,  including  surveys  and  focus  groups. 

6«1.2    Requirements  identification 

The  tool  user's  requirements  should  deal  A^th  the  question  of  what  the  CASE  tool 
should  do  as  well  as  its  impact  on  the  existing  environment.  The  following  tasks 
should  be  performed  in  building  the  list  of  requirements: 

Analyze  the  requirements  and  adjust  the  level  of  detail  to  which  requirements 
are  defined  and  measured. 

Evaluate  the  current  need  for  CASE  tools  while  taking  into  consideration 
those  projects  where  the  CASE  tool  may  initially  be  used. 

Identify  desired  methodology  (e.g.,  process-oriented,  data-oriented,  object- 
oriented). 

Identify  portions  of  the  life-cycle  to  be  supported  (e.g.,  planning,  analysis, 
design). 


18 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

Identify  required  functions  of  the  CASE  tool. 

Identify  required  quality  characteristics  of  the  CASE  tool 

Check  the  consistency  of  the  requirements  with  the  previously  established 
goals. 

NOTE  -  These  requirements  represent  the  total  set  of  organizational  requirements.  It  is  possible  that  no 
single  CASE  tool  may  satisfy  all  of  the  requirements,  but  that  individual  CASE  tools  may  satisfy  a 
sufficient  number  to  justify  their  use  by  the  organization,  which  may  continue  to  search  for  tools  to  support 
remaining  requirements. 

6.1«3    Requirements  structuring 

The  applicability  of  the  user  needs  identified  in  clause  9,  and  any  others  which  the 
organization  may  wish  to  add,  should  be  defined.  The  purpose  of  this  structuring  is 
to  organize  the  requirements  in  such  a  way  that  the  evaluation  can  proceed  more 
effectively.  The  tasks  include: 

Categorize  the  user  requirements  in  terms  of  the  organization  of  clause  9,  and 
decompose  them  into  detailed  specifications. 

Select  characteristics  and  specific  subcharacteristics  from  clause  9  which  can 
be  evaluated  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  the  CASE  tool  meets  the  detailed 
specifications. 

NOTE  1  -  The  extent  to  which  a  CASE  tool  supports  or  implements  a  specific  methodology  may 
be  a  oitical  ^ctor,  and  should  be  seriously  considered  when  selecting  characteristics  and  subcharacteristics 
and  weighting  those  subcharacteristics. 

Identify  weights  for  the  characteristics  and  subcharacteristics. 

NOTES 

2  -  The  weights  are  aj^lied  to  the  ratings  determined  during  the  evaluation  as  part  of  the  selection 
process,  and  reflect  the  relative  importance  of  the  related  selection  criterion  as  determined  during  the 
initiation  process. 

3  -  The  assignment  of  weights  is  a  subjective  task  \^ch  has  a  fiindamental  impact  on  the  outcome 
of  the  entire  evaluation  and  selection  process.  The  assignment  of  weights  should  reflect  both  the 
organization's  actual  requirements  and  the  ability  of  the  organization  to  evaluate  the  characteristic.  See 
Annex  B  for  further  discussion. 

4  -  ISO/IEC  12119:1994  addresses  quality  requirements  applicable  to  CASE  tools  when 
considered  as  software  packages,  and  should  be  consulted  as  part  of  the  requirements  structuring  task.  It 
provides  additional  guidance  on  a  subset  of  the  quality  requirements  of  ISO/IEC  9126:1991. 

19 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


6.2  CASE  tool  information  gathering 

A  general  search  of  potential  CASE  tools  to  be  evaluated  is  undertaken  based  upon 
the  requirements  and  selection  criteria  established.  The  activities  of  gathering 
information  and  identifying  the  candidate  CASE  tools  may  require  several  iterations 
to  quickly  and  eflBciently  identify  the  most  promising  tools  for  further  evaluation.  For 
the  CASE  toots  which  appear  most  promising  for  further  evaluation,  additional  and 
more  detailed  data  that  deal  with  their  potential  acquisition  are  obtained.  This 
additional  information  may  help  to  quickly  eliminate  many  tools,  allowing  attention 
to  be  focused  on  the  remaining  candidates.  Information  to  be  obtained  includes: 

Vendor  general  information  (e.g.,  business  history,  available  support,  plans  & 
strategies). 

Vendor*s  specific  product  development  strategy. 

The  tool's  cost  (e.g.,  price,  maintenance,  modifications,  training). 

The  hardware  and  software  required  to  support  tool  use. 

The  hardware  and  software  required  to  support  final  application/product  use. 

The  training  required  for  efficient  tool  use. 

The  tool's  functional  capabilities. 

The  tool's  methodology  and  life-cycle  support. 

How  the  tool  interfaces  to  external  systems. 

The  number  of  users,  existence  of  a  user's  group,  the  users*  response  to  the 
tool. 

The  tool's  license  mechanism  (e.g.,  floating  license,  multi-user  licenses,  cross 
platform  hcenses). 

6.3  Identifying  final  candidate  CASE  tools 

When  the  set  of  potential  candidate  tools  has  been  identified,  the  final  candidates  for 
selection  (those  to  be  evaluated)  may  be  chosen.  This  is  accomplished  through  the 
following  tasks: 

20 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

Establish  a  set  of  high-priority  or  critical  requirements  to  be  met  by  CASE 
tools. 

Compare  the  user's  functional  requirements  with  the  CASE  tool's  functional 
capabilities,  supporting  methodology,  system  environment. 

Compare  the  managerial  requirements  with  the  CASE  tool's  cost,  available 
training  and  support. 

Analyze  the  tool  vendors'  user  base,  user  response,  support  and  business 
history. 

Identify  tools  satisfying  a  sufficient  number  of  high-priority  or  critical 
requirements  which  then  become  the  final  candidates  for  formal  evaluation.  The 
results  of  the  previous  tasks  provide  the  justification  for  the  list  of  candidates. 

NOTE  -  The  tasks  described  in  this  paragraph  represent  a  •^screening"  of  possible  candidates  to  allow  the 
organization  to  identify  the  candidates  most  likely  to  be  acceptable,  given  the  organization's  requirements 
c»r  suppliers  abilities.  The  identification  of  final  candidates  can  be  performed  in  parallel  with  CASE  tool 
iiuonnation  gathering,  or  the  two  activities  may  be  iterated.  The  goal  is  to  reduce  the  cost  of  tool  evaluation 
by  only  considering  a  screened  set  of  fmal  candidates  during  the  evaluation  process. 


21 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

7        Evaluation  process 

Evaluation  can  begin  when  the  structured  requirements  have  been  defined  and  a 
screened  set  of  final  candidates  for  selection  have  been  chosen.  Final  preparations  will 
be  made  for  evaluating  the  candidate  CASE  tools,  including  the  development  of  an 
evaluation  plan.  The  evaluation  activities  are  then  performed  and  documented, 
resulting  in  a  profile  of  how  each  CASE  tool  measures  up  to  the  structured 
requirements.  The  objective  is  to  produce  the  technical  evaluation  reports  necessary 
for  the  selection  process,  as  shown  in  Figure  4. 


Prqxrbig 

for 
EvmbiUfM 

-< 

uiior  ^ 
Cowltdotcs   1 

t 

\ 

Ev.^.Uo^ 

V 

Evalyathg 
CASE 
Tools 

LogMid 

1— 1 

ProdMt 

^ 

\ 

Ev.h..Uo. 
....  lUporttof 

Eval««UoJ>|  " 
R.port     1 

S: 

^•i^- 

7.1 


Figure  4  *  Overview  of  evaluation  process 
Preparing  for  evaluation 


To  define  the  necessary  level  of  detail  prior  to  beginning  evaluation  activities,  final 
preparations  are  necessary.  Based  upon  the  list  of  candidate  CASE  tools  and  the 
structured  requirements,  the  following  tasks  should  be  accomplished: 

For  each  atomic  subcharacteristic,  define  or  select  one  or  more  metrics  and 
define  the  details  of  their  use. 

NOTE  1  -  ISO/IEC  JTCl  SC7  Working  Group  6  has  technical  reports  relating  to  metrics 
under  development  which  may  help  the  user  of  this  International  Standard  select  some  of  the  necessary 
metrics. 

Set  the  rating  levels  and  identify  the  means  by  which  the  levels  will  be 
generated  or  computed. 


22 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

NOTE  2  -  A  measured  metric  value  (e.g.,  average  lines  of  code  per  module  =  274)  must  then 
be  assigned  a  rating  value  (e.g.,  1.3  on  a  scale  of  0  to  4).  The  means  by  which  rating  levels  are  obtained 
from  measurements  must  be  identified. 

Define  the  assessment  characteristics  for  evaluation,  establishing  what  is 
acceptable,  taking  into  consideration  the  rating  levels  previously  defined  and  the 
context  of  use  of  the  product. 

Identify  and  schedule  all  activities  which  must  be  performed  as  part  of  the 
evaluation  process. 

NOTE  3  -  Activities  include  preparing  any  data  sets  necessary  for  the  evaluation,  obtaining 
tool  documentation  and  an  instance  of  the  tool  to  be  evaluated,  providing  evaluators  any  necessary 
training  in  tool  use,  hands-on  tool  use,  recording  of  tool  outputs,  and  analysis  of  results. 

In  some  cases,  a  Bench  Mark  Test  (BMT)  may  be  a  part  of  the  evaluation 
process.  The  recommended  approach  for  a  BMT  includes: 

•  Identify  the  required  critical  tool  functions. 

•  Identify  a  test  project  or  sample  program  to  be  the  basis  for  the  BMT. 

•  Develop  a  BMT  scenario,  defining  inputs  and  expected  outputs. 

To  focus  evaluation  activities  and  provide  for  traceability  of  the  evaluation 
process,  develop  an  evaluation  plan  which  includes  the  information  above. 

7«2       Evaluating  CASE  tools 

The  software  is  evaluated  in  comparison  with  each  of  the  chosen  characteristics. 
Evaluation  is  a  process  of  measurement,  rating  and  assessment. 

7.2.1     Measurement 

Measurements  can  be  made  based  upon  information  obtained  by  examining  the 
CASE  tool  itself,  or  information  about  it,  through  the  following  types  of  tasks: 

Examining  the  vendor-supplied  documentation. 

Examining  the  source  code  and  other  intermediate  products,  if  available. 

Inteiviewing  actual  users  of  the  software. 


23 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/DEC  14102:1995 

Viewing  demonstrations  and  intervievang  demonstrators. 

Executing  test  cases. 

Applying  to  test  projects. 

Examining  results  of  previous  evaluations  (whether  in-house,  third  party, 
or  other  evaluations). 

Performing  a  BMT  on  the  candidate  tools  and  analyzing  the  results. 

Measurement  values  may  be  binary,  based  on  a  continuous  scale  (quantifiable),  or 
textual.  There  are  both  objective  and  subjective  characteristics. 

NOTE  -  Objective  characteristics  are  those  which  permit  independent  and  repeatable  test  or  metric. 
Subjective  characteristics  are  those  for  which  no  independent  and  rq)eatable  test  or  metric  exists  (e.g., 
fitness  of  the  user  inter&ce  to  the  culture  of  the  user). 

For  objective  characteristics,  the  evaluation  should  be  made  by  a  repeatable 
procedure  such  that  another  evaluator  would  be  able  to  produce  the  same  results. 
Dunng  evaluation,  if  test  cases  are  used,  a  uniform,  predefined,  and  documented 
set  of  cases  should  be  used. 

For  subjective  characteristics,  the  evaluation  should  be  performed  repeatedly  by 
more  than  one  person  or  group,  who  will  discuss  and  agree  upon  results. 

The  evaluation  results  should  be  recorded  in  a  quantified  manner,  where  possible, 
together  with  textual  justification,  where  applicable. 

7.2.2  Rating 

In  the  rating  task,  each  measured  value  is  rated  against  the  scale  of  values  defined 
in  the  evaluation  plan.  Rating  levels  are  either  directly  generated  or  computed 
according  to  previously  defined  algorithms. 

NOTE  -  It  is  possible  that  requirements  may  be  revised  during  the  evaluation,  and  this  may  require 
revision  of  rating  scales. 

7.2.3  Assessment 

Based  upon  the  resulting  ratings  and  the  previously  defined  assessment  criteria, 
assess  the  subcharacteristics  and  characteristics.  In  accordance  \^dth  the  selection 


24 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

guidelines  and  the  evaluation  plan,  niings  should  be  aggregated  up  to  the 
characteristic  level. 

7.3       Evaluation  reporting 

The  end  result  of  the  evaluation  activities  will  be  an  evaluation  report.  An 
evaluation  report  may  address  all  tools  which  were  evaluated;  alternatively,  several 
evaluation  reports  may  be  written,  each  reporting  on  a  subset  of  the  tools 
evaluated.  The  evaluation  report  ^uld  contain  at  least  the  following  information: 

Tool  information* 

CASE  tool  name  J 

CASE  tool  version 
vendor 

host  configuration 
cost  elements 

background,  as  appropriate 

part(s)  of  the  life-cycle  for  which  the  CASE  tool(s)  is  intended 
type  of  software  model  the  CASE  tool(s)  is  based  on  (e.g.,  waterfall  model, 
spiral  model) 

•  CASE  tool  software  environment  (e.g.,  programming  language(s) 
supported,  method  supported,  operating  systems,  possible  configurations, 
configuration  used  in  evaluation,  miramum  configuration,  database  compatibility, 
software  of  other  vendors  required  for  the  environment) 

•  CASE  tool  Sanctions 

•  input/output  structure 

•  target  audience 

Evaluation  process. 

The  report  should  discuss  tte  specific  activities  and  tasks  in  the  evaluation 
process  in  the  detail  necessary  to  allow  the  reader  both  to  understand  the  scope 
and  depth  of  the  evaluation  and  to  repeat  the  evaluation,  if  desired. 

Specific  results. 

Evaluation  results  should  be  provided  in  terms  of  the  lowest  level  of 
subcharacteristic  decomposition  (normally  an  atomic  subcharacteristic).  For  each 
subcharacteristic,  the  metric  value  measured  should  be  given  in  terms  of  the  rating 
level  for  that  metric. 


25 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

Based  upon  the  lowest  level  results,  any  aggregation  should  be  shown  so  as 
to  make  clear  the  method  of  aggregation:  any  weights  used,  the  elements 
aggregated,  and  the  level  to  which  aggregation  is  performed.  The  result  will  be  a 
profile  describing  the  results  of  the  evaluation  in  terms  of  scores  for  the 
characteristics  of  clause  9,  or  in  terms  of  scores  for  subcharacteristics,  depending 
on  the  level  of  aggregation. 

In  cases  where  the  report  covers  multiple  tools,  or  where  the  results  of  this 
evaluation  vnll  be  compared  to  those  of  other  evaluations,  care  should  be  taken  to 
ensure  the  results  are  provided  in  a  uniform  format  which  facilitates  comparison 
(e.g.,  by  using  templates).  Objective  results  should  be  provided  with  minimal 
accompanying  text.  Subjective  results  should  be  supported  by  text  describing  the 
specific  reasons  for  the  metric  values  assigned. 

NOTE  -  The  information  specified  above  could  be  orgaxuzed  as  follows: 

Evaluation  process 

Goals,  criteria,  tools  evaluated 

Measurement  tools 

Tool  information 

Test  scenario 

Test  results  and  evaluation 

Evaluation  summary 


26 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

8        Selection  process 

Selection  can  begin  when  the  evaluation  reports  are  complete.  A  selection 
algorithm  should  be  defined  and  then  applied  to  the  results  of  the  CASE  tool 
evaluation  efforts.  A  decision  can  then  be  reconunended,  and  the  recommendation 
validated  against  the  original  set  of  goals  and  selection  guidelines.  An  overview  of 
the  process  is  shown  in  Figure  5. 


8.1 


Figure  5  -  Overview  of  selection  process 
Preparing  for  selection 


The  selection  algorithm  determines  how  the  data  generated  during  the  various 
evaluations  are  combined  and  compared  to  result  in  ratings  for  each  candidate. 

Based  upon  the  original  goals  and  selection  guidelines,  a  final  set  of  selection  criteria 
is  identified  and  the  basis  upon  which  these  criteria  are  to  be  assessed  is  defined.  This 
definition  will  be  based  upon  the  aggregated  evaluation  assessments  described  in 

7.2.3. 

The  algorithm  for  fiirther  aggregating  the  results,  comparing  the  candidates,  and 
arriving  at  a  decision  is  then  defined.  A  discussion  of  selection  algorithms  is  provided 
in  Annex  B. 

8.2       Applying  the  selection  algorithm 

The  evaluation  results  are  used  as  inputs  to  the  selection  algorithm.  Information 
relating  the  candidate  tools  is  output.  Each  tooFs  evaluation  results  provide  a 
technical  summary  of  each  tool's  characteristics,  aggregated  up  to  the  level  specified 


27 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

in  the  selection  algorithm  (usually  the  characteristic  level).  The  selection  algorithm 
combines  the  results  of  the  evaluations  of  the  various  tools,  providing  a  comparison 
for  use  by  decision  makers. 

8.3  Recommending  a  selection  decision 

When  the  selection  algorithm  has  been  applied,  a  decision  may  be  made  to  acquire  a 
tool  or  set  of  tools.  This  is  a  management  decision  based  upon  the  technical 
comparison  provided  above  and  additional  management  criteria. 

Such  a  decision  would  indicate  that  the  most  appropriate  of  the  candidates  has  been 
identified  for  selection.  Alternatively,  the  assessment  of  evaluation  results  may  show 
a  need  for  additional  information,  which  may  indicate  that  some  iterat^^^n  of  previous 
activities  is  necessary.  Evaluation  and  selection  scenarios  are  fiarther  discussed  in 
Annex  A. 

The  selection  decision  should  be  justified  with  a  rationale  which  summarizes  the 
information  and  logic  which  led  to  the  selection. 

8.4  Validating  the  selection  decision 

The  final  activity  in  the  process  should  be  the  validation  of  the  reconunended 
selection.  The  original  goals  and  selection  guidelines  should  be  reviewed  and 
compared  to  the  evaluation  results  and  other  data  relating  to  the  recommended 
selection.  A  check  should  be  made  to  ensure  that  if  the  reconunendation  is  accepted, 
the  high  level  goals  (or  a  sufficient  number  of  them)  will  be  met. 

It  may  be  found  that  no  adequate  tool  exists,  in  which  case  a  choice  may  be  made 
between  the  development  of  a  new  tool  or  the  modification  of  an  existing  tool  (within 
the  user  organization  or  outside),  or  abandoning  the  entire  evaluation  and  selection 
process. 


28 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


CASE  tool  characteristics 


The  user  needs  which  drive  any  evaluation  and/or  selection  process  Avill  be  based  upon 
the  characteristics  and  subcharacteristics  described  below.  By  defining  user  needs  in 
the  terms  used  here»  assessments  and  comparisons  may  be  made  based  upon  a  broad, 
common,  and  nearly  complete  set  of  characteristics.  As  discussed  above,  a 
stmcturing  activity  is  required  to  transform  the  set  of  needs  initially  identified  by  the 
user  into  the  terms  provided  here. 

The  top-level  evaluation  categories  are  called  characteristics.  Each  characteristic  is 
subdivided  into  subcharacteristics.  Subcharacteristics  may  be  further  subdivided  into 
lower  level  subcharacteristics.  At  the  lowest-level,  subcharacteristics  are  referred  to 
as  atomic  suLJharacteristics.  This  section  defines  atomic  subcharacteristics  in  terms 
of  their  attributes;  each  of  these  will  be  assigned  a  value  during  the  evaluation  process 
based  upon  one  or  more  metrics  (see  7. 1,  Preparation  for  evaluation). 

It  is  unlikely  that  any  user  of  this  International  Standard  will  need  to  use  all  of  the 
atomic  subcharacteristics  given  below;  users  should  select  only  those 
subcharacteristics  which  have  significant  weight  with  respect  to  their  organization's 
requirements.  There  will  be  cases  where  additional  needs  or  characteristics,  specific 
to  a  particular  evaluation  or  selection,  have  to  be  added  to  those  listed  below;  in  that 
sense,  the  atomic  subcharacteristics  listed  below  can  be  considered  a  partial  list,  to  be 
augmented  as  necessary. 

Non-atomic  subcharacteristics  are  assigned  values  by  aggregating  the  values  of  their 
component  subcharacteristics,  weighted  as  called  for  in  the  evaluation  plan.  This 
aggregation  task  is  continued  until  the  levels  of  aggregation  called  for  in  the 
evaluation  plan  have  been  reached.  The  selection  algorithm  is  then  used  to  combine 
the  evaluation  results  of  the  various  tools  for  comparison  and  decision. 

9,1        Functionality  -  characteristics  related  to  life-cycle  processes. 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  fiinctions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  CASE  tool  use  as  it  relates  to  software  engineering  life-cycle 
processes  and  activities.  For  those  life-cycle  processes  referenced,  the  definitions  in 
ISO/mC  12207:1995  apply. 

NOTE  -  This  section  addresses  CASE  support  for  several  life-cycle  processes.  Other  life-cycle  processes 
not  addressed  here  are  absent  either  because  CASE  tools  do  not  typically  provide  support  for  those 
processes,  or  because  the  process  and/or  the  CASE  support  for  it  are  not  stable  at  this  time. 


29 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

9.1.1  Characteristic:  Management  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  management  process  activities.  For  additional  attributes  that 
bear  on  management,  see  9. 1 .6  for  risk  management. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Cost  and  Schedule  Estimating:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  estimate  cost, 
schedule  and  other  project  parameters  based  upon  organizational  inputs. 

NOTE  1  -  For  example,  the  Constructive  Cost  Model  (COCOMO)  and  its  variants. 

Planning:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  user  entry  ahd  analysis  of 
project  planning  data.  "" 

NOTE  2  -  This  subcharacteristic  is  more  general  than  the  subcharacteristic  above;  in  addition  to 
cost  and  schedule  data,  it  includes,  for  example,  computer  and  other  facility  resources,  personnel  allocations, 
annual  calendar  defmiton  and  vacation  planning.  Also  included  is  the  capability  of  analysis  of  planning 
data,  such  as  a  critical  path  analysis  to  optimize  the  project  plan  with  respect  to  the  required  constraints, 
and  the  capability  of  reusing/modifying  the  planning  data. 

Project  Tracking:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  user  entry  of 
project  activity  data,  including  automated  data  gathering. 

NOTE  3  -  Examples  of  project  activity  data  which  may  be  tracked  include  completion  date,  funds 
expended,  resources  consumed,  number  of  documents  generated,  lines  of  code  developed,  number  of  test 
cases  completed,  and  number  of  defects  detected. 

Project  Status  Analysis  and  Reporting:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 
support  analysis  of  project  activities  based  on  the  data  tracked  and  provide  status 
reports  and  projections  in  user  definable  formats. 

Managing  Processes:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  the 
management  of  processes. 

NOTE  4  -  Process  management  includes  defining  detailed  work  items  by  defining  input, 
resources,  output,  personnel,  deadline,  etc.;  making  work  item  definitions  available  to  project  members; 
updating  work  status  by  (manually  or  automatically)  gathering  the  results  of  the  work.  Query  capability  is 
also  included. 

9.1.2  Characteristic:  Development  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 

30 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

properties  to  support  the  development  process  activities.  For  additional  attributes 
that  bear  on  the  development  process,  see  9.1.8. 

NOTE  -  The  set  of  development  functions  may  not  be  exhaustive,  and  additional  sufochaiacteristics  may  be 
considered  as  required. 

9.1.2.1  Subcharacteristic:  Modeling 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  modeling  activities  which  can  be  part  of  the  development 
process. 

NOTE  1  -  Modeling  functions  reflect  the  CASE  tool's  ability  to  support  the  identification  of  software 
requirements,  the  expression  of  software  design,  and  the  transformation  of  requirements  into  design. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Diagram  Development:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  the  entry  and 
editing  of  diagrams  of  types  of  interest  to  the  user,  and  to  translate  between  diagram 
types,  and  between  diagrams  and  text. 

NOTES 

2  -  Diagram  types  are  defined  in  ISO  5807:1985.  In  addition,  typical  diagram  types  include: 
control  flow,  data  flow,  deconqx)sition,  entity-relationship,  object  oriented,  Petri  nets,  state  transition,  and 
structure  charts. 

3  -  Rules  relevant  to  speciflc  diagram  types  should  be  enfcwced. 

Diagram  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  the  analysis  of 
graphical  figures  input  to  the  CASE  tool  and  extracting  and  storing  requirements 
and/or  design  information. 

NOTE  4  -Diagram  analyzers  are,  in  many  cases,  integrated  with  diagram  drawers,  but  go  beyond 

diagram  drawers  in  analytical  capability. 

Requirement  Specification  Support:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support 
the  entry  and  editing  of  requirements  specification  data  and  checking  the  consistency 
and  completeness  of  the  requirements  data  against  allowable  specification  constructs 
and  rules. 

NOTES 

5  -  Classes  of  requirements  data  which  may  be  considered  include:  functional,  data,  inter&oe, 
quality,  performance,  hardware,  environment,  cost,  and  schedule  requirements. 

31 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

6  -  A  fonnal  language  may  be  used  to  express  requirements  data. 

Pesign  Specification  Support:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  the 
entry  and  editing  of  design  specification  data  and  checking  the  consistency  and 
completeness  of  design  data  against  allowable  specification  constructs  and  rules. 

NOTES 

7  -  Classes  of  design  data  which  may  be  considered  include:  functioiuil,  data,  interface,  quality, 
performance,  hardware,  environment,  cost,  and  schedule  information. 

8  -  A  formal  language  may  be  used  to  express  requirements  data. 

Specification  Construct  Modeling:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support 
the  entry  and  editing  of  information  describing  the  types  of  constructs  that  a 
specification  can  contmn,  including  their  relationships  and  depiction. 

NOTE  9  -  Types  of  constructs  which  might  be  modeled  include  data  structures,  data  flows, 
objects,  processes  and  states. 

Simulation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  simulate  aspects  of  a  system's 
potential  operation  based  upon  requirements  and/or  design  data  available  to  the  CASE 
tool. 

NQIE  10  -  Examples  of  aspects  to  be  simulated  include  system  effectiveness  (operational  utility), 
operator  interface,  and  architectural  performance  (response  time,  utilization,  throughput). 

Prototyping:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  generate  a  prototype  model  of 
all  or  portions  of  a  system  based  upon  user-supplied  requirements  and/or  design 
information. 

NOTE  1 1  -  Prototyping  features  of  CASE  products  may  sometimes  be  replaced  by  4GL/graphical 
user  interfece  (GUI)  tools.  Such  replacement  requires  fluent  transition  from  modeling  to  design  activities 
and  back. 

Human  Interface  Modeling:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  model  the 
content  aspects  of  human-computer  interactions  and  the  mechanical  aspects  of  those 
interactions. 

NOTE  12  -  Exan^>les  of  content  aspects  of  human-computer  interactions  are  presentations  (e.g., 
menus,  screen  and  window  layouts  and  report  designs)  and  querying  (e.g.,  text,  voice,  touch,  icon  or  other 
inputs).  Examples  ofmechanical  aspects  include  window  location,  size,  and  colors;  voice  volume  and 
pitch,  and  touch  sensitivity). 


32 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


9.1.2.2  Subcharacteristic:  Construction 


A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  construction  activities  which  can  be  part  of  the  development 
process. 

NOTE  1  -  Constnjction  fimctions  reflect  the  tool's  ability  to  produce  operational  (e.g.,  executable)  elements 
of  the  fmal  system  to  be  fielded,  or  to  modify  an  existing  system.  Many  of  the  functions  in  this  paragraph 
are  dependent  upon  a  specific  language  or  languages.  Examples  of  such  languages  include  programming 
languages,  data  and  queiy  languages,  graphics  languages,  and  operating  system  interfaces  such  as  job 
control  languages.  The  user  of  this  International  Standard  should  identify  those  languages  relevant  to  the 
specific  effort. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Code  Generation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  generate  code  in  one  or 
more  specific  languages  based  upon  design  data  available  to  the  CASE  tool. 

NOTE  2  -  Typical  code  generation  capabihties  include  general  purpose  code  generation,  database 
generation,  query  generation,  screen  displayAnenu  generation.  Another  form  of  code  generation  is  the  direct 
generation  of  executable  code. 

Database  Schema  Generation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  generate 
database  schema  based  upon  user-supplied  information. 

Screen  Generation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  generate  display  screens 
based  upon  user-supplied  information. 

Report  Generation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  automate  the 
development  of  reports  to  be  produced  by  the  system  under  development  (as  opposed 
to  the  CASE  tool). 

Compilation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  compile  code  in  one  or  more 
specific  languages. 

Syntax  Directed  Editing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  the  entry 
of  source  code  in  one  or  more  specific  languages  with  syntax  support  provided  by  the 
editor. 

Debugging:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  the  identification  and 
isolation  of  errors  in  a  program, 

NOTE  3  -  Typical  capabilities  include  providing  tracebacks  and  identifying  &ult  location  in  terms 
of  source  code. 

33 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

9.1.3    Characteristic:  Maintenance  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  maintenance  process  activities. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Problem  understanding:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  determine  that  a 
problem:  results  fi^om  a  user  misunderstanding,  has  already  been  resolved,  is  going  to 
be  resolved  in  the  context  of  another  maintenance  action,  or  is  a  new  problem  to  be 
resolved. 

Localization:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  identify  the  portion  of  the 
software  requiring  modification,  given  the  identification  of  a  problem. 

Impact  analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to,  for  each  change  foreseen, 
identify  potential  consequences  of  making  the  change. 

Data  Reverse  Engineering:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  extract 
information  from  source  code  which  defines  or  describes  the  data  elements  and 
structures  of  the  software. 

NOTE  1  -  Examples  of  typical  outputs  include  design  language  code,  data  dictionary  entries,  and 
direct  entiy  of  design  data  into  the  CASE  tool's  database. 

Process/Procedure  Reverse  Engineering:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 
extract  process  design  data  from  source  code. 

NOTE  2  -  Examples  of  typical  outputs  include  design  language  code,  design  diagrams,  and  direct 
entiy  of  design  data  into  die  CASE  tool's  database. 

Source  Code  Restructuring:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  input  existing 
source  code  in  one  or  more  specific  languages,  modify  its  format  and/or  structure 
according  to  defined  directives  (e.g.,  reduce  size  of  code,  reduce  execution  time, 
implement  code  format  standard)  and  output  a  source  code  file  in  the  same  language. 

NOTE  3  -  Examples  of  typical  capabilities  are  pretty  printers  and  source-level  optimizers. 

Source  Code  Translation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  input  existing 
source  code  written  in  one  or  more  specific  languages,  translate  it  into  a  diflferent 
language,  and  output  the  resuhing  code. 


34 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 


9.1,4    Characteristic:  Documentation  Process 


A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  ^notions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  documentation  process  activities. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Text  Editing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  edit  text. 

Graphical  Editing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  enter  and  edit  data  in 
graphical  format. 

Forms-Based  Editing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  user  definition 
of  forms  and  subsequent  forms-based  editing. 

Publishing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  desktop  publishing. 

Hypertext  Support:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  hypertext 
formats  and  fiinctions. 

Variant  Handling:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  reuse  the  same  generation 
of  the  product  with  limited  variation. 

NOTE  -Examples  include  change  of  objects  in  screen  panes  (e.g.,  logo)  and  adaptation  to  local 
requirements  (e.g.,  language). 

Automatic  Data  Extraction  and  Document  Generation:  attributes  relating  to 
its  ability  to  accept,  store  and  retrieve  specifications  of  the  content,  format  and  layout 
of  textual  and  graphical  data  to  be  extracted  and  produced,  and  its  ability  to  then 
extract  and  produce  the  data  in  compliance  with  a  specification. 

9.1.5    Characteristic:  Configuration  Management  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  fiinctions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  configuration  management  process  activities. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Access  Control:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  control  access  to  data 
elements. 

NOTE  1  -  Access  control  includes  the  ability  to  specify  components  to  be  no  access,  read  only, 

35 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO,/IEC  14102 :  1995 

etc.  based  upon  work  groups,  or  other  similar  identifier,  as  well  as  the  ability  to  check-out  data  elements 
for  modification  and  restrict  access  to  them  (locking)  until  they  have  been  updated  and  checked  back  in 
(unlocking). 

Tracking  of  Modifications:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  maintain  a  record 
of  all  modifications  made  to  the  system  under  development  or  maintenance. 

NOTE  2-  As  design  and  code  information  is  changed,  includes  automatically  iqxlating  and 
keeping  consistent  all  related  information  kept  in  the  tool. 

Definition  and  Management  of  Multiple  Versions:  attributes  relating  to  its 
ability  to  nudntmn  records  and  perform  management  functions  on  multiple  versions 
of  a  system  which  may  share  conunon  components. 

Configuration  Status  Accounting:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  provide 
the  user  with  reports  defining  the  history,  contents  and  status  of  the  various 
configuration  items  being  managed. 

Release  Generation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  user  definition 
of  steps  required  to  create  a  version  (build)  of  the  software  for  release,  and  to 
automatically  execute  those  steps. 

Archival  Capability:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  automatically  place  data 
elements  in  secondary  storage  for  subsequent  retrieval. 

NOTE  3  -  Archiving  typically  involves  long  term  storage  of  information  off-line  for  use  in 
reconstructing  a  syston  ^iiich  was  damaged  or  accessing  data  which  is  seldom  needed.  Archiving  features 
which  may  be  considered  include  level  of  automation,  ease  of  retrieval,  data  compression  capabilities  and 
security  against  both  loss  and  unauthorized  access. 

9.1.6    Characteristic:  Quality  Assurance  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  quality  assurance  process  activities. 

Atomic  Subcharacteristics: 

Quality  Data  Management  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  user 
entry  of  quality  data,  analyze  quality  data,  and  generate  information  to  support  quality 
management. 

NOTES 

1  -  Examples  of  quality  data  include  quality  assurance  plans,  results  of  reviews  and  audits,  test 

36 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

results,  fault  and  corrective  action  reports,  and  values  of  complexity  metrics. 

2  -  Includes  the  ability  to  handle  quality  data  by  variant 

Risk   Management:    attributes   relating  to   its   ability  to   support   risk 
identification,  risk  estimation,  risk  impact  assessment,  risk  monitoring  and  controlling. 

NOTES 

3  -  Risks  to  be  analyzed  might  be  categorized  into,  but  not  limited  to,  project  risks,  technical  risks, 
and  business  risks. 

4  -  Risk  management  support  capabilities  might  include  hazard  analysis  in  critical  applications 
such  as  air  trafTic  control  systems  or  nuclear  power  plant  control  systems. 

9.1.7    Characteristic:  Verification  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  verification  process  activities.  For  additional  attributes  that 
bear  on  the  verification  process,  see  9.1.8;  additional  fiinctional  capabilities  relating 
to  verification  may  be  found  embedded  in  existing  development  subcharacteristics. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Specification  Traceability  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  perform 
traceability  analyses. 

NOTE  1  -Analyses  normally  address  information  from  the  level  of  requirements  specifications 
through  design  data. 

Specification  Analyses:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  perform  analyses 
based  upon  the  requirements  and  design  data  available  to  the  tool. 

NOTE  2  -  Specific  types  of  analyses  might  include:  algorithm,  complexity,  control  flow,  data  flow, 
data  normalization,  data  use,  interface,  human-machine  interface,  range  bound,  and  structure. 

Source  Code  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  input  source  code  in 
one  or  more  specific  languages  and  perform  analyses. 

NOTE  3  -  Exan^les  of  such  analyses  include  the  measurements  of  size,  calculation  of  complexity 
metrics,  generation  of  cross-references,  and  review  for  conformance  to  standard  usages. 


37 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

9.1.8    Characteristic:  Validation  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties  to  support  the  validation  process  activities. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Proof  of  Correctness  Techniques:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  formally 
prove  assertions  about  features  or  operations  of  the  software  to  be  validated. 

Failure  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  analyze  failures  and  trace 
them  back  to  defects. 

Defect  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  analyze  defects  and  trace 
them  forward  to  failures. 

Test  Case  and  Expected  Result  Entry:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 
support  user  entry  of  test  cases  and  entry  of  expected  test  case  results. 

Test  Case  and  Expected  Result  Generation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 
automatically  generate  test  cases  based  upon  existing  requirements  and/or  design 
specification  data  available  to  the  tool  and  to  automatically  generate  expected  test 
case  results. 

Test  Traceability:  attributes  relating  to  traceability  of  test  activities  and  data. 

NOTE  1  -  Aspects  include  traceability  of  test  data  to  other  test  data  (e.g.,  test  requirements  to  test 
design  to  test  cases)  as  well  as  traceability  of  test  data  to  activities  and  data  from  other  life-cycle  activities 
(e.g.,  requirements  specifications  to  test  cases  and  test  cases  to  source  code). 

Source  Code  Instrumentation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  automatically 
instrument  code  to  be  tested  in  order  that  test  events  can  be  identified  and  recorded. 

Input  Capture  and  Replay:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  capture  operator 
inputs  (e.g.,  keyboard,  mouse)  and  the  extent  to  which  such  data  can  be  edited  and 
replayed  in  subsequent  test  cases. 

Test  Driving:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  execute  and/or  replay  test 
cases. 

Run-time  Analysis'  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  analyze  the  performance 
of  a  program  as  it  executes. 


38 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

NOTE  2  -  Capabilities  may  include  the  abili^  to  verify  and  report  on  assertions  (or  exceptions) 
encountered  during  execution,  as  well  as  reporting  on  CPU  utilization,  memory  utilization,  accesses  to 
specified  data  elements  and/or  code  segments,  and  timing  characteristics. 

Reliability  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  analyze  measures  of 
software  reliability. 

NOTE  3  -  Examples  of  reliability  measures  include  measures  of  complexity,  software  science 
attributes  and  the  mean  time  between  failure  (MTBF); 

Test  Coverage  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  analyze  and  report 
on  test  coverage,  including  system  coverage  analysis  and  function  coverage  analysis. 

NOTE  4  -  For  example,  statements  which  were/were  not  executed,  procedures  which  wereAvere 
not  called,  and  variables  which  were/were  not  accessed. 

Test  Procedure  Management:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  manage  test 
activities  and  a  test  program. 

NOTE  5  -  For  example,  the  ability  to  maintain  a  schedule  of  plaimed  activities,  capture  and  record 
the  results  of  test  activities,  and  generate  status  reports. 

Regression  Testing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  regression 
testing. 

NOTE  6  -  For  example,  the  ability  to  re-run  previous  tests;  the  ability  to  modify  previous  tests  to 
account  for  system  and/or  environmental  differences  (e.g.,  date,  time). 

Automatic  Result  Checking:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  automatically 
compare  expected  test  case  results  and  actual  test  case  results. 

Test  Statistical  Analysis:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  statistically  analyze 
and  report  on  test  results. 

NOTE  7  -  For  example,  percent  of  test  cases  executed  and  per  cent  of  test  cases  passed. 

Operations  Environment  Simulation:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support 
the  simulation  of  a  real  operations  environment,  such  as  a  large  number  of  users,  as 
well  as  various  scenarios  of  use  and  various  configurations. 

NOTE  8  -  For  example,  the  ability  to  automatically  generate  simulated  inputs  to  the  system  being 
tested  based  upon  received  system  outputs. 

Integration  Testing:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  software 

39 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

integration  activities. 

NOTE  9  -  For  example,  the  automatic  generation  of  body  stubs  for  top-down  testing  or  the 
automatic  generation  of  driver  procedures  for  bottom-up  testing. 

9.2       Functionality  -  characteristics  related  to  CASE  tool  usage. 

The  following  characteristics  relate  the  tool  to  its  environnoent  and  the  projects  it  will 
be  used  to  support. 

9.2.1     Characteristic:  Environment  in  which  the  CASE  tool  operates. 

A  set  of  attributes  which  bear  on  the  relationship  between  the  CASE  tool  and  its 
operational  (host)  environment. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Required  Hardware  Characteristics  of  Tool:  attributes  relating  to  any 
hardware  requirements  for  its  use. 

NOTES 

1  -  Typical  hardware  items  to  be  listed  include  processors  (including  co-processors),  main  memoiy 
size,  bus  type,  tyf)e  and  size  of  peripheral  storage,  extension  or  graphics  cards,  input  and  output  equipment. 

2  -  The  user  of  this  International  Standard  should  identify  hardware  items  for  which  the  minimal 
requirements  may  not  provide  adequate  performance,  e.g.,  main  memoxy.  Hardware  necessary  to  provide 
acceptable  performance  should  be  identified. 

3  -  The  user  of  this  Litemational  Standard  should  identify  hardware  items  which  are  sui>ported 
by  the  tool  as  options,  e.g.,  input  and  output  devices. 

Required  Software  Environment  of  Tool:  attributes  relating  to  any  software 
items  required  for  its  use. 

NOTE  4  -  Typical  software  items  to  be  listed  include  operating  systems,  database  management 
systems,  languages,  character  sets  and  character  codes,  and  communications/network  packages. 

Software  Repository  (Information  BaseV  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 
house  and  manage  all  relevant  software  engineering  process  information.  This 
includes  its  ability  to  make  information  developed  in  one  life  cycle  activity  available 
for  use  during  other  activities,  as  well  as  its  ability  to  provide  access  to  this 
information  to  other  environment  elements. 


40 


data. 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

NOTES 

5  -  Examples  of  such  information  include  requirements  and  design  documentation,  code,  and  test 

6  -  Includes  the  ability  to  handle  relevant  data  by  variant. 

Physical  Environment  of  Tool:  attributes  relating  to  any  geographical  aspects 
of  the  development  environment  which  will  impact  tool  use. 

NOTE  7  -  Considerations  include  physical  and  temporal  separation  of  users  and  the  related  issues 
of  networking  considerations,  on-line/oflf-line  considerations,  and  repository  updating/mirroring  at  multiple 
sites. 

9.2.2     Characteristic:  CASE  tool  integrability. 

A  set  of  attributes  which  bear  on  the  ability  of  the  CASE  tool  to  integrate  and 
interoperate  with  other  items  in  its  operational  environment.  The  evaluation  and 
selection  of  CASE  tools  is  performed  in  the  context  of  the  software  engineering 
environment  in  which  the  tool  will  be  used. 

NOTE  -  Examples  of  other  environmental  items  include  those  given  in  the  hardware  and  software 
environment  of  the  tool,  above. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Compatibility  with  Environment  Elements:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 
interoperate  with  and/or  directly  exchange  data  with  hardware/software 
environments. 

NOTES 

1  -  Examples  of  other  software  tools  include  word  processors  and  other  documentation  tools, 
databases,  repositories,  and  other  CASE  tools. 

2  -  If  the  tool  contains  an  inter&cing  capability  (e.g.,  an  application  progranuning  interface)  which 
allows  the  tool  to  be  used  independently  of  environment  elements,  that  interface  should  be  described. 

3  -  The  extent  to  \^ch  the  tool  conforms  to  standards  for  '^openness*'  including  data  interchange 
fomiats,  can  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  a  number  of  existing  standards,  including,  for  example,  ECMA  TR 
55,  A  Reference  Model  for  Frameworks  of  Software  Engineering  Environments^  ECMA  149,  Portable 
Common  Tool  Environment  (PCTE)  Abstract  Specjfication,  ISO/IEC  9945-1 :  POSlXmd  ISO  9075-^1. 

4  -  Process  management,  project  management  and  system  development  functions  may  be  provided 
by  separate,  specialized  tools.  In  such  a  case,  the  connectivity  between  the  different  tools  should  be 
considered  under  this  subcharacteristic. 


41 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

Data  Integration:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  use,  process,  and  deliver 
information  shared  by  other  tools  or  part  of  a  repository. 

NOTE  5  -  The  CASE  tool  should  be  evaluated  against: 

Metadata:  if  the  framework  is  based  on  a  specific  data  model  (e.g.,  Entity/Relationship 
or  Object  Oriented),  the  ability  of  the  CASE  tool  to  generate,  manipulate  or  access  compatible  structures 
of  the  relevant  data  model  (e.g.,  compatible  type,  constraint,  attribute  or  relationship). 

Product  data  engineering:  if  the  repository  holds  a  formal  data  description  for  software 
engineering,  the  ability  of  the  CASE  tool  to  generate,  manipulate  or  access  relevant  data  according  to  its 
functional  scope. 

Control  Integration:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  interact  with  the  SEE, 
in  particular,  with  other  tools. 

NOTES 

6  -  Lfivocaticn  of  the  tool  may  be  ocntrolled  by  rules,  e.g.,  security  policies,  pre-  or  post-invocation 
of  other  tools,  allowable  concurrency  and  synchronization.  The  rules  may  be  defined  by  the  supported 
method.  The  level  of  compatibility  of  rules  might  be  addressed. 

7-  Different  communication  mechanisms  exist  in  different  frameworlcs.  Communication  between 
tools  can  be  handled  by  sharing  data  within  a  repository,  by  message  queues  between  tools,  by  client-server 
approaches,  or  by  remote  procedure  calls.  For  example,  consider  the  X3.46  control  integration  and  Portable 
Common  Tool  Environment  (PCTE)  approaches.. 

Presentation  Integration:  attributes  relating  to  the  level  of  the  homogeneity, 
compatibility,  and  consistency  of  its  user  interface  with  that  of  the  remainder  of  the 
SEE. 

NOTES 

8  -  With  respect  to  all  integration  characteristics,  if  the  CASE  tool  was  not  developed  specifically 
for  the  framework,  attention  should  be  addressed  on  ways  of  adapting  it  to  the  framework  (e.g., 
encapsulation).  For  example,  an  important  issue  is  the  \xser  interface,  which  might  not  be  homogenous  with 
those  of  other  tools  despite  the  fact  that  the  tools  share  a  common  framework. 

9  -  In  the  case  that  the  framework  is  defined  by  a  specification  (e.g.,  expressed  in  a  language  such 
as  C  or  Ada),  the  specification  of  the  tool  interface  should  be  comparable. 

Metadata  Access:  attributes  relating  to  the  access  provided  to  the  tool's 
metadata. 


42 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

9.2.3    Characteristic:  Aspects  of  the  CASE  tooFs  application. 

A  set  of  attributes  which  bear  on  the  relationship  between  the  CASE  tool  and  the 
projects  to  which  it  is  applied,  including  the  environment  of  its  products  and 
characteristics  of  those  products. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Hardware  and  Software  Environment  of  Tool  Products;  auributes  relating  to 
the  set  of  hardware  and  software  items  on  which  or  with  which  the  products  of  the 
tool  can  be  used. 

NOTE  1  -  The  level  of  platform  support  in  the  target  environment  may  be  a  consideration;  e.g., 
docs  the  CASE  tool  generate  screens,  and  does  it  generate  calls  to  an  external  (platform  or  environment) 
service  to  generate  the  screens. 

Conformance  to  Standards  -  Tool  Products:  attributes  relating  to  conformance 
of  the  products  resulting  from  its  use  to  standards. 

NOTE  2  -  Examples  include  language,  database,  repository,  communication.  GUI, 
documentation,  development,  configuration  management,  security,  portability,  and  information  interchange 
standards. 

Domain  of  Application:  attributes  relating  to  the  application  dommns  which 
the  CASE  tool  is  designed  to  support. 

NOTE  3  -  Examples  of  application  domains  ir^lude  transaction  processing,  real-time,  information 
management,  and  safety  critical. 

Size  of  Application  Supported:  attributes  which  would  result  in  size 
limitations  of  the  application  and  therefore  limit  the  tooVs  applicability. 

NOTE  4  -  Such  parameters  might  include  lines  of  code,  levels  of  nesting,  size  of  database,  number 
of  data  elements,  and  number  of  configuration  items. 

Languages  Supported:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  specific 
languages. 

NOTE  5  -  Examples  of  such  languages  include  programming  languages,  data  and  query 
languages,  graphics  languages,  bnd  operating  system  interfaces  such  as  job  control  languages. 

Databases  Supported:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  support  specific 
databases. 


43 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

Methodology  Support:   attributes  relating  to  the  set  of  methods  or 
methodologies  which  it  can  support. 

NOTES 

6  -  Examples  of  methods  or  methodologies  include  various  object  oriented  approaches,  structured 
(top  down)  approaches,  data  driven  approaches,  and  real-time  extensions. 

7  -  A  CASE  tool's  supjx>rt  for  a  method  or  methodology  can  be  evaluated  based  upon  the  extent 
that  the  tool  provides  the  specific  capabilities  necessaiy  to  implement  the  methodology. 

Internationalization:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  be  used  in  different 
cultures  and  to  generate  products  in  terms  of  different  countries  or  cultures. 

NOTES 

8  -  Examples  include  using  natural  different  languages,  character  sets,  character  and  graphic 
presentation  modes  (left-right,  top-bottom),  and  different  date  formats. 

9  -  This  subcharacteristicmay  have  an  influence  on  other  hardware  or  software  environment 
elements. 

9.3       General  quality  characteristics 

The  following  characteristics  describe  the  quality  of  the  tool  in  the  terms  of  ISO/IEC 
9126. 

NOTE  -  Further  guidance  on  evaluating  the  subcharacteristics  in  this  section  can  be  found  in  ISO/IEC 
12119-1994. 

9.3.1     Characteristic:  Functionality 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  existence  of  a  set  of  functions  and  their  specified 
properties.  The  fiinctions  are  those  which  satisfy  stated  or  implied  needs. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Security:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  prevent  unauthorized  use  or  misuse 
of  itself 

NOTE  1  -  Security  may  also  encompass  all  or  part  of  the  system  on  which  the  tool  is  used. 

Accuracy:  attributes  relating  to  the  provision  of  right  or  agreed  results  or 
effects. 


44 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

Regulatory  Compliance:  attributes  relating  to  adherence  to  q)plication  related 
legal  and/or  regulatory  requirements. 

Technical  Compliance:  attributes  relating  to  adherence  or  compliance  with  any 
identified  standards. 

NOTE  2  -  Exanq)les  induck  language,  database,  rq)ositoiy,  communicaticm,  GUI,  documentation, 
development,  configuration  management,  security,  portability,  and  inf(»mattoii  interchange  standards. 

9.3.2  Characteristic:  Reliability 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  capability  of  the  software  to  maintain  its  level  of 
performance  under  stated  conditions  for  a  stated  period  of  time. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Data  Integrity:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  correctly  store  and  retrieve 
information  with  a  high  degree  of  confidence. 

Automatic  Backup:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  automatically  initiate  a 
backup  routine  to  save  the  current  state  of  the  process. 

NOTE  1  -  Typically  backups  are  scheduled  at  a  predetermined  interval  by  the  vendor  or  are 
scheduled  by  the  user. 

Error  Handling:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  detect  abnormal  behavior, 
notify  the  user  that  a  problem  has  occurred,  and  properly  exit  or  save  the  work  to  the 
point  of  interruption. 

NOTE  2  -  This  may  include  error  messages  displayed  to  the  screen  and  a  screen  directed  means 
of  either  exiting  or  saving. 

Fault  Tolerance:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  maintain  a  specified  level 
of  performance  (e.g.,  "failsofl"  or  reduced  capability)  in  cases  of  various  faults  (e.g., 
hardware,  software,  network). 

Recoverability:  attributes  relating  to  its  capability  to  re-establish  its  level  of 
performance  and  recover  the  data  directly  affected  in  case  of  a  failure,  and  the  time 
and  effort  needed  for  it. 

9.3.3  Characteristic:  Usability 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  effort  needed  for  use,  and  on  the  individual 

45 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

assessment  of  such  use,  by  a  stated  or  implied  set  of  users. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

User  Friendliness:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  integrate  into  the  tool 
user's  activities,  taking  into  account  the  user's  level  of  experience  and  expertise,  and 
the  concepts,  information,  representations  and  procedures  that  are  part  of  the  user 
work  domain  and  culture  (professional  and  individual). 

User  Guidance:  attributes  relating  to  the  provisions  to  allow  the  tool  user  to 
know  the  status  of  tool  operation,  to  establish  the  causal  relationship  between  user 
actions  and  tool  status,  and  to  assess  and  direct  user  actions  on  the  tool. 

NOTE  1  -  Capabilities  may  be  provided  in  the  form  of  on-line  help  features,  and  diagnostic  and 
error  messages. 

Homogeneity:  attributes  relating  to  the  consistency  of  logic  within  an 
application  or  across  applications,  at  the  procedural  level  as  well  as  for  the 
presentation  of  information. 

Adaptability;  attributes  relating  to  the  ability  of  its  interface  to  adapt  to  various 
task  requirements,  strategies,  habits,  and  cultural  modes  (e.g.,  languages,  character 
sets,  date  formats). 

NOTE  2  -  Adaptability  has  several  aspects:  the  ability  to  adapt  to  users  with  differing  levels  of 
experience,  the  ability  of  the  user  to  customize  input  and  output  methods  (e.g.,  macros  and  screen  displays 
and  formats),  and  in  the  number  of  procedures,  options  and  commands  available  to  a  user  to  achieve  a  given 
objective. 

Claritv  of  Control-  attributes  relating  to  the  extent  to  which  the  semantics  of 
the  dialogue  steps  (e.g.,menu  selections,  window  choices)  used  to  control  the  tool, 
reflect  the  resulting  action,  and  the  predictability  of  the  action. 

Error  Handling:  attributes  relating  to  its  abilities  to  help  and  guide  the  user  in 
identifying  and  correcting  errors,  and  to  maintain  tool  integrity  (avoiding  incorrect 
data  and  process  changes). 

Conciseness:  attributes  which  decrease  the  required  number  of  steps  to 
identify  and  memorize,  and  which  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  dialogue. 

Ease  of  Learning  attributes  relating  to  the  amount  of  time  and  effort  required 
for  a  user  to  understand  normal  CASE  tool  operations  and  to  become  productive. 


46 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

NOTES 

3  -  The  availability  and  quality  of  on-line  tutorials  may  be  a  factor  in  ease  of  learning. 

4  -  These  features  should  be  integrated  within  the  presentation  and  structure  of  the  data  on  the 
screen  (or  reports). 

Tool  Documentation  Quality:  attributes  relating  to  the  overall  quality  of  the 
documentation  provided  with  the  tool. 

NOTES 

5  -  EkKumentation  quality  factors  include:  completeness,  correctness,  consistency, 
understandability,  and  ease  of  overview. 

6  -  To  the  extent  that  the  tool  implements  a  methodology,  descriptions  of  the  methodology  should 
accompany  the  tool. 

Ease  of  Installation:  attributes  relating  to  how  easy  it  is  for  the  user  to  play  the 
required  role  in  initial  installation  and  in  the  subsequent  installation  of  updates. 

9.3.4    Characteristic:  Efficiency 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  relationship  between  the  level  of  performance  of 
the  software  and  the  amount  of  resources  used,  under  stated  conditions. 

NOTE  -  hi  evaluating  a  CASE  tool  against  the  subcharacteristics  which  follow,  consideration  should  be 
given  to  jobs  of  both  typical  and  maximal  size. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Throughput:  attributes  relating  to  the  performance  of  the  tool  in  performing 
stated  tasks. 

NOTE  1  -  Examples  include  query  response  time  and  time  to  analyze  100,000  lines  of  code.  In 
some  cases,  performance  benchmark  data  are  available  from  external  sources. 

Acceptable  Response  Time:  attributes  relating  to  the  acceptability  of  the  time 
required  for  the  CASE  tool  to  respond  to  a  user  input  with  the  appropriate  response 
in  the  expected  operational  environment. 

Data  Storage  Requirements:  attributes  relating  to  the  amount  of  mass  storage 
required  (e.g.,  disk,  tape)  to  accommodate  the  tool  itself  and  any  databases  required 
and/or  generated  by  the  tool. 


47 


IS  14653  :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102  :  1995 

Acceptable  Memory  Capacity:  attributes  relating  to  the  amount  of  CPU 
addressable  memory  required  to  load  and  operate  the  tool. 

NOTE  2  -  A  determination  of  the  amount  of  memoiy  required  for  acceptable  tool  performance 
should  be  made,  as  many  tools  will  operate  in  a  memory-poor  environment,  but  will  do  so  oiJy  marginally. 

Acceptable  Processing  Speed:  attributes  relating  to  the  processor  (type  and 
speed)  required  to  operate  the  CASE  tool  at  an  acceptable  level  of  performance. 

9.3.5  Characteristic:  Maintainability 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  effort  needed  to  make  specified  modifications. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Vendor  Support:  attributes  relating  to  the  availability,  responsiveness,  and 
quality  of  services  provided  by  the  vendor  to  tool  users. 

NOTE  1  -  Such  support  services  might  include  telephone  support,  local  technical  support,  on-site 
support,  publication  of  "known  defect  lists". 

Ability  of  Tool  to  Follow  Changes  jn  Methodology:  attributes  relating  to  the 
ability  of  the  tool  vendor  to  modify  the  tool  to  maintain  methodology  support,  as  a 
methodology  changes  over  time. 

Updates:  attributes  relating  to  the  vendor's  track  record  in  making  regular 
updates  which  address  recognized  problems  and/or  provide  additional  capabilities, 

Expandability:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  be  easily  modified  to  meet 
expanded  user  needs  without  requiring  major  modification,  expense,  or  schedule 
change. 

NOTE  2  -  Related  to  changeability,  except  here,  vendor  intervention  or  additional  hardware  and/or 
software  may  be  required. 

9.3.6  Characteristic:  Portability 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  ability  of  the  software  to  be  transferred  fi'om  one 
environment  to  another. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Portabilitv  to  Different  Hardware  Platforms,  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to 

48 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

run  on  various  versions  of  the  same  hardware  platform  or  on  different  hardware 
platforms. 

Compatibility  With  Different  Operating  Systems:  attributes  relating  to  its 
ability  to  run  on  various  versions  of  the  same  operating  system  or  on  different 
operating  systems,  and  the  ease  with  which  it  can  be  modified  to  run  on  updates  to 
an  operating  system. 

Ability  to  Move  Data  Between  Versions  of  the  Tool:  attributes  relating  to  the 
ability  of  one  version  of  the  tool  to  use  data  generated  by  a  different  version  of  the 
tool,  and  the  extent  of  data  manipulation  required  for  reuse. 

Portability  with  Windowing  Systems:  attributes  relating  to  its  ability  to  be 
ported  between  windowing  systems  (e.g..  Open  Look  and  Motif). 

9.4       General  characteristics  not  related  to  quality 

The  following  characteristics  are  general  in  nature,  and  address  both  the  tool  itself, 
the  tool  developer  and/or  vendor: 

9.4,1     Characteristic:  Acquisition  Process 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  acquisition  process  necessary  if  the  CASE  tool  is 
selected  for  adoption. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Cost  of  Tool  Implementation:  attributes  relating  to  the  cost  of  implementing 
the  tool. 

NOTE  }  -  All  aspects  relevant  to  the  specific  instance  should  be  considered.  Not  only  tool 
purchase  price,  but  also  the  costs  for  installation,  initial  maintenance,  hardware/software  revision  or 
upgrades,  and  training.  Price  data  on  all  relevant  configurations  should  be  considered,  including  single 
copy,  multiple  copies,  site  license,  corporate  license,  and  network  license. 

Licensing  Policies:  attributes  relating  to  the  supplier's  licensing  policies. 

NOTE  2  -  These  include  available  license  options,  the  right  to  copy  (media  and  documentation), 
and  any  restrictions  and/or  fees  for  secondaiy  usage.  That  is,  the  tool  user  sells  products  which  include  some 
element  or  aspect  of  a  tool  used  to  develop  the  product.  Also,  any  temis  and  conditions,  including  product 
guarantee,  which  apply  to  the  tool. 

Export  Restrictions:  attributes  relating  to  the  identification  of  any  restrictions 

49 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

on  the  export  of  the  tool,  or  of  any  secondary  usage  of  the  tool. 
9A.2    Characteristic:  Implementation 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  tooVs  delivery,  installation  and  operation. 
Atomic  subcharacteristics: 
Cost  Effectiveness:  attributes  relating  to  the  cost  of  tool  operation. 

NOTE  1  -  A  cost/benefit  analysis  may  be  performed,  or  some  consideration  given  to  the  expected 
level  of  productivity  of  the  CASE  tool 

Development/Delivery  Constraints:  attributes  relating  to  any  schedule 
constraints  involving  fiirther  product  development  and/or  delivery.  In  addition,  the 
time  required  for  the  tool's  users  to  become  productive  with  the  tool  (learning  curve) 
should  also  be  considered. 

Workarounds  Required  for  User  Organization:  attributes  relating  to  any 
workarounds  which  would  be  required  to  implement  the  CASE  tool  in  the  user's 
environment.  An  example  of  such  a  workaround  is  finding  a  way  to  use  a  centralized 
tool  (single  common  database)  in  a  distributed  environment. 

Infrastructure  needs:  attributes  relating  to  infrastructure  requirements  for  tool 
use. 

NOTE  2  -  Examples  include  floor  space,  table  space,  furniture,  electricity  and  other  physical 
requirements  generated  by  new  tool-related  hardware  or  tool  use  considerations. 

9.4.3    Characteristic:  Support  Indicators 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  vendor's  ability  to  provide  tool  support. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Supplier  Profile:  attributes  relating  to  a  general  indication  of  the  supplier's 
overall  capability. 

NOTE  1  -  Examples  include:  the  supplier's  size,  number  of  years  in  business,  market  share,  a 
financial  statement,  listing  of  any  complementary  products,  identification  of  relevant  business  relationships 
(e.g.,  other  tool  suppliers),  local  presence,  and  the  company's  planned  direction  for  future  development. 

Product  Profile:  attributes  relating  to  general  product  use  information. 
50 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/TEC  14102 :  1995 

NOTE  2  -  Examples  include:  product  age,  number  of  paid  installations,  number  of  distributors 
of  the  tool,  existence,  size  and  level  of  activity  of  a  user's  group,  number  of  versions  supported,  availability 
of  dial  up  help  hot-line,  availability  of  nmintenance  contracts,  formal  problem  reporting  system,  product 
development  program,  lead  times  (e.g.,  new  functions,  trouble  reports,  customer  su{^rt),  body  of 
applications,  freedom  from  error,  and  availability  (commercial,  government,  public  domain,  in-house,  or 
under  development). 

Training  Availability:  attributes  relating  to  the  availability  of  training  materials 
and  training  courses,  both  at  the  vendor's  facility  and  at  the  purchaser's  fecility. 

NOTE  3  -  Conditions  under  which  training  can  be  supplied,  including  the  availability  of  courses 
customized  for  specific  user  needs  should  be  considered. 

9.4.4    Characteristic:  Evaluation  or  Certiflcation 

A  set  of  attributes  that  bear  on  the  evaluation  or  certification  of  the  developer  or  the 
product. 

Atomic  subcharacteristics: 

Developer  Evaluation  or  Certification:  attributes  relating  to  the  evaluation  or 
certification  by  a  professionally  recognized  software  engineering  evaluation 
orgaiuzation  that  the  developer's  software  engineering  practices  meet  some  minimum 
level,  or  the  vendor's  intention  to  obtain  such  an  evaluation  or  certification. 

NOTE  -  For  example,  a  capability  maturity  assessment  based  upon  the  Software  Engineering 
Institute's  Capability  Maturity  Model,  or  ISO  9001  certiHcation. 

Product  Certification:  attributes  relating  to  the  certification  by  an  appropriate 
party  that  the  tool  complies  with  a  specific  standard. 


51 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/DEC  14102 :  1995 

Annex  A 

(informative) 

Considerations  on  the  use  of  this  International  Standard 

There  are  a  number  of  possible  scenarios  when  evaluating  and/or  selecting  CASE 
tools.  Different  budness  goals  may  be  handled  by  the  processes  defined  herein.  The 
initiation  process  defined  in  the  International  Standard  can  be  used  in  all  scenarios  to 
help  guide  the  overall  project  plan. 

In  planning  the  work,  the  following  two  areas  should  be  considered: 

A.1  What  is  the  scope  of  the  CASE  tool  search? 

The  set  of  evaluation  and  selection  processes  may  be  performed  to  satisfy  one  of 
several  objectives.  These  include  the  following: 

The  organization  wishes  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  purchase  a  specific  tool. 
There  is  only  one  candidate;  the  candidate  should  be  evaluated  to  determine  whether 
its  benefit  will  justify  its  purchase,  and  a  selection  decision  made. 

The  organization  wishes  to  provide  automated  support  for  some  aspect  (e.g., 
life-cycle  phase)  of  its  software  development  process.  For  example,  it  may  decide  it 
wants  to  provide  a  tool  for  maintaining  requirements  and  top  level  design  information, 
to  trace  requirements  to  design,  and  to  generate  related  documentation.  A  detailed 
set  of  requirements  should  be  defined  and  candidates  identified,  a  selection  algorithm 
adopted,  and  the  candidates  evaluated. 

An  organization  wants  to  improve  its  software  development  process,  but  is  not 
sure  where  to  start.  The  organization  should  review  the  activities  and  tasks  in  the 
initiation  process.  Before  considering  the  applicability  of  a  specific  CASE  tool,  the 
organization  should  consider  a  more  complete  assessment  of  its  current  processes. 
This  will  assist  the  organization  in  its  decision  whether  to  install  a  CASE  tool. 

A.2  To  what  extent  can  existing  evaluations  be  used? 

The  user  of  this  International  Standard  provides  consistency  in  the  evaluation  and 
selection  processes.  This  can  be  used  to  benefit  those  instances  where  an  organization 
uses  one  or  more  evaluations  that  have  been  done  at  some  eariier  time,  either  by  itself 
or  by  another  organization.  In  such  a  case,  care  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
evaluations  performed  by  different  organizations  are  appropriate  for  comparison.  User 
needs,  upon  which  the  various  evaluations  were  based,  should  be  compared  and 

52 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 

consideration  given  to  the  expertise,  motivation,  and  possible  biases  of  the 
organization(s)  which  originally  performed  the  evaluation.  In  addition,  the  metrics 
used  to  evaluate  the  subcharacteristics  should  be  examined  for  applicability.  It  should 
be  noted  that  if  new  evaluation  results  are  to  be  compared  to  results  of  previous 
evaluations,  the  metrics  and  rating  scales  used  should  be  as  similar  as  possible. 

In  another  scenario,  one  or  more  CASE  tools  are  only  evaluated  without  proceeding 
to  selection.  For  example,  the  evaluation(s)  may  be  performed  as  a  self-evaluation  by 
a  CASE  tool  supplier,  or  for  entry  into  a  data  repository  by  a  tool  evaluation 
organization.  In  this  case,  the  evaluations  should  be  general  in  nature,  performed 
against  all  relevant  user  needs,  in  as  much  as  the  needs  of  interest  to  future  selectors 
cannot  be  determined. 

A«3  Other  considerations 

During  the  evaluation  and  selection  processes,  there  are  other  considerations  to  be 
taken  into  account.  For  example: 

Information  may  be  obtained  during  evaluation  activities  which  leads  to  a 
modification  of  the  requirements  and,  possibly,  re-evaluation  of  some  candidates. 

Upon  completion  of  evaluations,  there  may  be  no  significant  difference 
between  the  top  candidates.  This  may  be  addressed  by  selecting  arbitrarily,  by 
modifying  the  selection  algorithm,  or  by  modifying  the  requirements  and/or  metrics 
and  performing  additional  evaluation  activities. 

Levels  of  evaluation  may  be  performed,  interspersed  with  selection  (or 
elimination)  activities.  For  example,  if  a  large  number  of  candidates  is  identified,  an 
initial,  top-level  evaluation  may  be  performed  of  all  candidates  and  a  cost^enefits 
analysis  performed  to  allow  the  elimination  of  some  candidates.  Further,  more 
detailed,  evaluation  of  the  remaining  candidates  may  be  performed,  followed  by  the 
elimination  of  some.  This  process  may  be  repeated  several  times  until  a  final  selection 
is  made. 


53 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102  :  1995 

Annex  B 

(informative) 
Examples  of  selection  algorithms 

An  important  part  of  the  selection  process  is  the  application  of  some  algorithm  to  the 
evaluation  results.  Algorithms  used  by  organizations  vary  widely.  Selection 
processes  rely  upon  some  assignments  of  weights  to  characteristics,  and  then 
combining  the  resulting  weighted  evaluation  ratings  using  some  algorithm. 


B.l  Considerations  in  assigning  weights 

The  weights  assigned  to  subcharacteristics  and  characteristics  must  reflect  the 
organization's  actual  needs.  If  the  assignment  of  weights  reflects  the  opinion  of  a  few 
individuals*  individual  preferences  rather  than  the  organization's  actual  needs,  there  is 
a  higher  risk  that  the  CASE  tool  selected  will  not  be  successfully  adopted. 

To  allow  the  evaluation  to  provide  useful  information  for  the  selection  process,  the 
weights  must  provide  for  the  discrimination  between  candidate  tools  where  the  tools 
differ  substantially  in  meeting  the  particular  organization's  needs.  Experience 
indicates  that  characteristics  which  are  difficult  for  an  organization  to  evaluate  (e.g., 
lack  of  access  to  data,  insufficient  resources)  tend  to  result  in  a  very  narrow  range  of 
ratings  for  the  candidate  tools.  For  example,  if  an  organization  is  not  in  a  position  to 
critically  evaluate  some  characteristic,  e.g.,  reliability,  the  candidate  tools  will  most 
likely  be  assigned  ratings  in  a  narrow  range  (e.g.,  3.0  -  3.5  out  of  4).  The  higher  the 
weight  assigned  to  such  a  characteristic,  the  smaller  will  be  the  spread  between  the 
weighted  scores,  and  thus  the  less  the  process  will  be  able  to  discriminate  between 
tools. 

Thus  the  user  of  this  International  Standard  should  assign  the  highest  weights  to 
characteristics  which  reflect  the  organization's  actual  needs  and  which  can  be 
evaluated  with  some  degree  of  detail. 

B.2  Types  of  algorithms 

There  are  several  general  approaches  to  selection  algorithms: 

An  organization  may  use  an  algorithm  which  leads  to  a  single  rating  for  each 
candidate  tool  and  then  compare  the  ratings. 

An  organization  may  establish  upper  and  lower  thresholds  within  which  a 

54 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 


tooFs  rating  must  fall. 


An  organization  may  make  a  selection  based  upon  a  profile  of  each  tool  and 
the  use  of  management  judgement. 

Examples  of  several  typical  approaches  are  provided  below. 

Algorithms  commonly  in  use  include  cost-based  algorithms,  score-based  algorithms, 
and  rank-based  algorithms.  They  are  discussed  below,  and  examples  are  provided. 
There  are  advantages  and  disadvantages  to  each  approach  -  no  recommendation  is 
made.  Organizations  desiring  an  honest  evaluation  and  selection  process  should 
choose  an  algorithm  which  it  has  sufficient  resources  to  implement,  and  which  is 
appropriate  to  the  specific  case  in  point. 

B«3Cost-based  algorithms 

These  algorithms  identify  some  minimal  acceptable  level  of  capability  (based  upon  the 
needs)  and  identify  all  tools  providing  that  capability.  The  acceptable  tools  are  then 
ranked  according  to  cost.  The  lowest  cost,  acceptable  tool  is  presumably 
recommended.  This  approach  is  sometimes  mandated  by  organizational  procurement 
regulations. 

Proponents  of  a  cost-based  approach  usually  cite  the  ease  of  application,  perceived 
fairness  (more  objective),  and  lowest  resulting  cost  of  recommended  tool. 

Opponents  of  this  approach  often  counter  that  the  precise  definition  of  the  actual  user 
requirements  is  very  difficult,  and  represents  a  major  risk.  Another  criticism  is  that 
this  approach  is  not  sensitive  to  cost^enefit  tradeoffs.  That  is,  the  low  cost  tool  will 
meet  the  minimum  requirements,  but  a  tool  which  is  somewhat  more  expensive  might, 
by  exceeding  the  minimum  requirements,  provide  a  substantially  higher  level  of 
productivity,  resulting  in  a  better  overall  value  in  the  long  term. 

B.4  Example  of  the  application  of  a  cost-based  algorithm 

An  organization  decides  that  it  wants  to  provide  its  software  developers  with 
a  detailed  design  tool  which  will  allow  its  users  to  enter  design  data  and  which  then 
produces  a  data  dictionary,  certain  specific  charts  and  diagrams,  and  performs  a 
number  of  consistency  and  completeness  checks  (all  well-defined).  The  tool  to  be 
purchased  must  operate  in  a  specific  hardware/software  environment.  The 
organization  identifies  all  the  candidate  tools  which  run  in  the  desired  environment 
and  claim  to  provide  the  required  capabilities.  It  obtains  evaluation  copies  of  the 
candidates,  assigns  evaluation  personnel  to  verify  that  the  tools  do  indeed  provide  the 

55 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

required  products  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  The  costs  of  each  candidate  are  then 
computed.  This  organization  considers  "cost"  to  include  purchase  price,  five  years 
of  maintenance  and  updates,  documentation,  and  initial  installation  and  training.  The 
tool  whose  overall  cost  is  lowest  is  purchased. 

B.S  Score  and  rank-abased  algorithms 

Score  and  rank-based  algorithms  are  very  similar  in  that  in  each  case,  a  single  value 
for  each  tool  is  calculated  by  multiplying  the  weight  given  to  each  user  need  by  some 
number  and  adding  those  products.  In  the  case  of  a  score-based  algorithm,  the 
number  which  is  weighted  is  a  score  of  how  well  the  tool  meets  the  user  need, 
according  to  some  predefined  scale  (e.g.,  4  on  a  scale  of  1  to  5).  In  the  case  of  a 
rank-based  algorithm,  the  number  which  is  weighted  is  the  ordinal  rank  of  how  well 
this  tool  meets  the  need  when  compared  to  the  other  tools  under  consideration  (e.g., 
second  best  out  of  five  candidates).  Score-based  algorithms  attempt  to  provide  an 
absolute  measure  of  each  tool  evaluated,  and  tools  can  be  individually  evaluated.  The 
tool  with  the  highest  score  is  recommended.  Rank-based  algorithms  attempt  to 
provide  relative  measures  of  a  number  of  tools;  tools  cannot  be  individually  evaluated, 
and  the  result  for  a  given  tool  is  dependent  upon  the  set  of  competing  tools  being 
evaluated.  The  tool  with  the  lowest  score  is  recommended. 

When  comparing  score  and  rank-based  algorithms  to  the  cost-based  approach, 
proponents  of  score  and  rank-based  algorithms  contend  that  these  algorithms  are 
more  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  tool  users:  evaluations  are  typically  less  fiinctional  and 
more  qualitative  in  nature,  and  are  often  performed  by  fiiture  users.  They  also 
contend  that  these  approaches  are  more  sensitive  to  ranges  of  capabilities  (vs. 
minimum  capabilities)  and  therefore  amenable  to  cost/benefit  trade-offs  and 
productivity  enhancement  analyses. 

Proponents  of  cost-based  approaches  often  argue  against  score  and  rank-based 
algorithms,  arguing  that  the  evaluations  become  much  more  expensive  and  subjective. 
They  contend  that  evaluators  allow  their  personnel  biases  to  direct  the  assignment  of 
scores  or  ranks,  alleging  that  evaluators  decide  first  which  tool  to  select  (based  upon 
subjective  characteristics)  and  then  assign  scores  or  ranks  which  justify  their  earlier 
decision.  They  also  contend  that  much  of  the  additional  detail  usually  provided  in 
score  and  rank-based  evaluations  is  specious;  that  in  practice,  when  the  weights  are 
applied  and  the  values  from  many  user  needs  are  combined,  the  results  are  usually 
very  close,  and  the  differences  in  scores  which  are  obtained  are  somewhat  arbitrary. 

When  comparing  score-based  algorithms  to  rank-based  algorithms,  proponents  of 
score  based  algorithms  point  out  that  score  based  algorithms  provide  an  "absolute" 
measure  of  a  tool's  quality,  and  are  independent  of  other  tools,  in  particular,  of  the 

56 


IS  14653 :  1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

specific  set  of  other  candidates.  They  identify  as  an  advantage  that  score-based 
evaluations  can  be  carried  out  independently  of  one  another,  using  the  most 
appropriate  personnel,  resources  and  schedule.  Proponents  of  rank-based  approaches 
counter  that  evaluating  tools  in  a  vacuum  is  pointless,  and  that  when  an  organization 
is  evaluating  tools  with  an  imminent  purchase  in  mind,  direct  comparison  between  the 
tools  is  required,  and  that  independence  is  no  advantage.  They  also  point  out  that 
while  rank-based  evaluations  require  the  same  personnel  to  evaluate  all  the  candidate 
tools,  it  is  very  difficult  for  different  evaluators  to  consistently  apply  the  same 
evaluation  characteristics,  making  the  score  for  a  tool  a  fiinction  of  its  evaluators, 
rather  than  the  tool's  intrinsic  quality. 

B.6  Profile  algorithms 

Consumer  product  testing  agencies  often  provide  results  in  the  form  of  a  profile  of 
each  candidate  product.  In  the  context  of  CASE  tools,  the  characteristics  of  major 
importance  to  the  user  are  evaluated  and  the  results  input  into  the  selection  process. 
No  specific  amalgamation  of  these  partial  results  is  done.  The  selector(s)  reviews  the 
profile,  and  based  upon  the  judgement  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  various 
characteristics  to  the  organization,  makes  a  selection. 

B.7  Other  applicable  algorithms 

There  are  a  number  of  additional  selection  algorithms,  developed  in  the  academic 
arena,  which  might  be  applied  when  appropriate  for  the  organization.  These  are 
particularly  useful  when  an  organization  is  &ced  with  evaluation  data  which  are  fiizzy 
or  sparse  and  is  having  difficuhies  in  amalgamating  the  viewpoints  of  multiple 
evaluators  and/or  selectors. 

Borda*s  algorithm  (Black,  1958;  Fishbum,  1973)  -  a  sum  of  the  ranks 
algorithm, 

Condorcet*s  algorithm  (Black,  1958;  Fishbum,  1973)  -  a  pairwise  comparison 
algorithm. 

Dodgson's   algorithm   (Black,    1958;   Fishbum,    1973)   -   a   preference 
measurement  algorithm. 

Fishbum's  algorithm  (Fishbum,  1973)  -  a  preference  ordering  algorithm. 

Lexicographic  algorithm  -  a  criteria  comparison  algorithm. 

Analytic  Hierarchy  Process  (Saaty,  1980)  -  a  structured  algorithm. 

57 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102 :  1995 

The  algorithms  (tiscussed  above  are  all  quantitatively  based.  Another  approach  is  the 
qualitatively  based  approach  referred  to  as  Grounded  Theory.  Rather  than  starting 
by  identifying  requirements  to  be  met  and  criteria  to  be  measured,  this  approach 
begins  with  an  examination  of  experience  to  date;  e.g.,  discuss  with  CASE  tool  users 
their  experience  with  CASE  technology  as  a  starting  point.  Relevant  references 
include: 

Glasser  &  Strauss,  ''The  Discovery  of  Grounded  Theory,  Strategies  for 
qualitative  researcH\  Aldine,  New  York,  1967 

Bubcoko,  Janis  A.,  Jr.,  ''Towards  a  Corporate  Knowledge  Repository', 
SYSLAB  Report  No.  91-023,  1991 


58 


IS  14653:1999 
ISO/IEC  14102:1995 


Annex  C 

(informative) 
Bibliography 


ISO/TEC  JTCl  SC7  Working  Group  6  is  preparing  several  documents  which  are 
relevant  to  software  quality  and  evaluation.  They  include: 

Series  1:  Software  quality  characteristics  and  metrics 

ISO/IEC  9126-1:-*  Information  technology  -  Software  quality 
characteristics  and  metrics  -  Part  1:  Quality  characteristics  and  subcharacteristics 
(Revision  of  ISO/IEC  9126:1991). 

Series  2:  Evaluation  of  software  products 

ISO/IEC  14598-1:-*  Infornuition  technology -Software  product  evaluation - 
Part  1:  General  overview. 

ISO/IEC  14598-2:-'  Infcmnation  technology  -  Software  product  evaluation  - 
Part  2:  Planning  and  mcmagement. 

ISO/nSC  14598-3  :-*  Infommtion  technology  -  Software  product  evahtatiai  - 
Part  3:  Process  for  developers. 

ISO/IEC  14598-4:-'  Infcnrntion  technology  -  Software  product  evahuitiat  - 
Part  4:  Process  for  acquirers. 

ISO/IEC  14598-5:-'  Information  technology  -  Software  product  evabdatiai  - 
Part  5:  Process  for  evaluators. 

ISO/EEC  14598-6:-'  Information  technology  -  Software prodiKt  evahtation  - 
Part  6:  Evaluation  modules. 


1)  To  be  published. 

59 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  maybe  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (^Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc :  No.  LTD33  (  1731 ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU    OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  94  02,  323  33  15  (  Common  to 

all  offices ) 

Regional  Offices:  Telephone 


Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  f  323  76  17 

NEWDELHI  110002  13233841 


Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola  [   337  84  99,  337  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700054  1   337  86  26,  337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  f  60  38  43 

1  60  20  25 

Southern  :  C.  I.  T,  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  6001 13  f  235  02  16,  235  04  42 

\  235  15  19,235  23  15 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  f  832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI  400093  1  832  78  91,  832  78  92 

Branches  :  AHMAD ABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR. 
KANPUR.    LUCKNOW.    NAGPUR.     PATNA.     PUNE.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  New  India  Printing  Press,  Khurja.  India 


