**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10087 (1981) : Code of practice for handling of 
electrostatic sensitive devices [LITD 5: Semiconductor and 
Other Electronic Components and Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : I0O&7- 1981 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

HANDLING OF ELECTROSTATIC 

SENSITIVE DEVICES 



UU C 62 1 3 049' 7 7 -004-2 : 005- 76 




© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAK MARG 

NEW DELHI 11M02 

Q r 4 Jfaamkr 1982 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

HANDLING OF ELECTROSTATIC 

SENSITIVE DEVICES 



Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee, 

LTDC 10 

Chairman Representing 

Dr B. H. Wadia Behram Wadia & Associates, Pune 

Members 
Shri A. K. Bansal Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri K. S. Mann ( Alternate ) 
Dr T, R. Bhat Semiconductor Limited, Pune 

Shri B. S. Raju ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. S. Buxi The Radio Electronics and Television Manufacturers' 

Association ( RETM A ) , Bombay 
Shri K. C. Ghhabra Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri M. A. Ranganath ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Divekar Bharat Heavy ElectrieaJs Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri D. P. Joshi ( Alternate ) 

Shri B. J. Vasanth ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. C. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Dr G.C.Jain National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Dr B. K. Das ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director, STDS ( S & T )-II Research Designs & Standards Organization, 

Lucknow 

Joint Director, STDS ( Elec )-I ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. B. Kalbag Hind Rectifiers Ltd, Bombay 

Dr W. S. Khokle Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, 

Pilani 

Dr S. M. Deval ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Phadnis Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri P. K. Rao Directorate General of Inspection ( DGI ), Ministry 

of Defence 

Shri M. A. Ranganath ( Alternate ) 
Representative Electronics Corporation of India Ltd ( Department 

of Atomic Energy), Hyderabad 
Shri A. Satyanarayana Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri S. Badrinarayana ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. R. Savoor Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri Y. Gopal Rao ( Alternate ) . . 

Dr D. P. S. Seth P & T Board ( Ministry of Communications ; 

Shri G. Soni Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Dr A. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Jain, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officw Member ) 

Head ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. S. Rawat 
Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

HANDLING OF ELECTROSTATIC 

SENSITIVE DEVICES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 23 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor 
Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0*2 Modern technology has produced devices, for instance, metal oxide 
silicon devices, with dielectric layers of the order of 0*1 micron thick. The 
thinness of such layers often results in a value of gate breakdown voltage 
of 70 to 100 volts. Static electricity of many thousands of volts can, however, 
be generated in many everyday ways. The factory operator can generate 
static electricity by moving around on a chair, brushing against benches 
or walls, or simply walking across the floor. Items handed from one person 
to another, or being wrapped or unwrapped, can acquire a static charge. 
Air conditioning systems, and the spraying of synthetic materials, such as 
cleaning liquids or conformal coatings, can also result in generation of 
static charge. Clothing of man-made fibres is specially prone to generate 
static charge. This static electricity is usually not even noticed by the 
operator, but its transfer can nevertheless be sufficient to destroy a device. 

0.3 Some devices are provided with inbuilt protection against static charge, 
but it is not necessarily sufficient under all circumstances, and the only 
true safeguard is to prevent the build-up of charge on the device terminals. 
This code of practice outlines the methods by which it may be done. 

0.4 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following documents. 

a) IEC Doc: 47(C.O.) 701: 'Handling precautions for static sensitive 
semiconductor devices' issued by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission. 

b) BS 78/22265 'Draft standard code of practice for the handling 
of static sensitive devices' issued by the British Standards Institution, 
United Kingdom. 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code of practice gives the precautions which apply to the storage, 
transport, handling and testing of all kinds of static-sensitive devices, 
circuits and assemblies. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Electrostatic-Sensitive Device ( ESD ) — A device which can be 
damaged as the result of the transfer of static electricity via its terminals. 

Note - — ESDs include MOS ( Metal Oxide Silicon ) devices, and certain other 
low-leakage devices. 

2.2 Special Handling Area ( SHA ) — A working area, organized to 
the requirements of 5 of this code of practice, where ESDs may be handled 
without damaging them by discharge of static charge. 

2.3 Conductive — For the purpose of this code of practice only, conductive 
is defined as having a surface electrical conductivity of >0*01 mm per 
square ( surface resistivity < 100 k Q per square ). 

Note — This definition permits the use of metal and/or certain types of foam. 
Metal is robust and readily available, but may physically damage dropped devices, 
and it will effect any discharge more rapidly than foam. 

2.4 Ground — For the purpose of this code of practice only, ground is 
defined as either: 

a) earth potential as imposed by an earth spike which is completely 
independent of the earth conductors of the mains electrical supply, 
or 

b) a uniform potential other than earth potential. 

Note — Earth potential is most often convenient, but is not mandatory. 
In aircraft or boats, or at the top of tall buildings, it may be more convenient 
to accept alternative (b). Extra care should be taken when transferring devices 
between areas at different potentials. 

2.5 Bonding — For the purpose of this code of practice only, bonding 
is defined as interconnections of various devices, tools, equipment, surfaces, 
etc, so that the potential of the device and of everything with which it is 
likely to come into contact will be the same. 

2.6 Package — Box in which the electrostatic-sensitive device is externally 
packed. 

Note — In this code of practice, package is not intended to refer to the plastic 
encapsulation of the device, or its hermetically sealed can. 



IS : 10087 - 1981 
3. EQUIPMENT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

3.1 Identification — The equipment designer, while choosing an electro- 
static-sensitive device, should take care that its nature is notified to all other 
associated agencies involved in procurement, layout, use, etc. He should, 
where appropriate, annotate drawings and parts lists with 'ESD 5 , and 
where appropriate give instructions on the sequence of assembly. Particular 
note should be made of protective components, the removal of which would 
leave the ESD unprotected. 

3.2 Layouts — These should be so designed that inadvertent touching 
of high-impedance points is avoided, and the use of dummy shorting con- 
nections facilitated. For instance, any printed wiring tracks linked to the 
input pins of ESDs should be placed away from the board edges to minimize 
the risk of handling contact when the boards are being assembled or fitted 
to equipment. 

3.3 Warning Notices — The design of the equipment should allow for 
the provision of warning notices, especially for the information of mainte- 
nance and servicing personnel who may have no connection with the original 
equipment maker. In this respect, servicing and instruction manuals 
should deal adequately with ESD treatment. 

3.4 Protection — Termination resistances or other electrical protection 
should be fitted as close to the ESD as possible. 

3.5 Gates — All unused gate inputs should be linked to the appropriate 
voltages supply rail, depending on the function, so as to reduce the risk 
of burnout across an unconnected gate. MOS gates in particular should 
not be left with floating inputs, since, unlike TTL, MOS gates may shift 
at random from one state to another due to small static charges. 

3.6 Capacitance — - Excessive capacitive loads, for example, those resulting 
from layout or attached cables, should be avoided when using ESDs. 

3.7 External Protection — In so far as the required performance of the 
circuit permits, any internal device protection can be supplemented by 
external components specified by the designer, for example^ bleed resistors 
or suitable voltage limiters. 

3.8 Power Supplies — Circuits containing ESDs should incorporate 
protection to prevent transients on mains supplies greater than 100 volts 
peak. Local power lines should be protected, so that transients above 
20 microjoules are inhibited. 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

4. MARKETING, PACKAGING AND TRANSPORTATION 

4.1 Manufacturer's Literature — The manufacturer's catalogue and 
individual device data sheets should clearly indicate that the device in 
question is sensitive to electrostatic charge. 

4.2 Marking of the Device ■ — Suitable markings shall be made on the 
devices to declare its sensitive nature. 

4.3 Packaging — Each device should be adequately packed to protect 
it mechanically, and to prevent the build-up of static electricity on indivi- 
dual leads. The latter may be achieved by, for example, 

a) the interconnection of all the leads on each device, for instance, 
by wire, spring clip, metal foil or metal eyelet, or 

b) by mounting the device on, or surrounding it by conductive material, 
or 

c) by the use of other materials having anti-static properties. 

4.4 Package Marking — A warning label and adequate instructions 
must be encountered before it is possible to expose the device. The warning 
label should preferably seal the package. 

4.5 Distribution — The device manufacturer should ensure that every 
distributor or agent complies with this code of practice and despatch notes 
should indicate clearly that the device is electrostatic-sensitive. 

4.6 Transportation — No special precautions are required provided 
the package ( see 4.3 ) remains intact. 

5. SPECIAL HANDLING AREA ( SHA ) 

5.0 General — Individual ESDs should never be directly handled, except 
in a special handling area ( SHA ). There are two types of handling areas. 
The first establishes a uniform potential to all devices within the area by 
means of electrically conductive connections. The second relies on electri- 
cally conductive ( ionized or humid ) air. To establish an SHA, one or 
other of the following should, therefore, be followed. A special handling 
area arrangement is shown in Fig. 1 as typical workstation layout. 



IS : 10087 - 1981 



-I0N12IN8 All* SLOWER 



ilVCM T<* 



egfJCH TOP 

GROUNDING CLAMP 



GROUND 



CONDUCTIVE RIBBON 
INTERCONNECTING THE 
BENCH TOP WITH 
FLOOR' MAT 




CONOUCTIVE BOOTS OR 

HEEL GROUNDING PROTECTORS 



CONDUCTIVE STOOL SEAT COVBR 
CONDUCTIVE FLOOR MAI 



Fig. 1 Typical Workstation Layout 



5,1 Type 1 

5.1.1 Organisation 

5.1.1.1 Working surfaces — The working surface should be conductive 
and grounded, and should be of a size to accommodate not only the work 
in hand but also all tools and input and output trays. 

5.1.1.2 Seating — Chairs and tools should each have a conductive 
cover to the seat and should be bonded. 

5.1*1.3 Containers — Any container which forms part of the SHA 
permanent equipment should be conductive and bonded. For transit 
and storage, containers may have to be stocked at the SHA ( see 6.4.3. ) 

5.1.1*4 Skin contacts — A quick-release skin contact ( for example, 
wrist strap ) should be provided for each operator and should have a leakage 
resistance to ground of between 100 k Q and 1 MQ. 

5*1*1.5 Floor surfaces — The floor surface and any foot-rest should be 
conductive and bonded. 

5.1.1.6 Electrical supplies — Any mains electrical supply to the SHA 
should be fed through a suitable isolating transformer with an earth leakage 
trip device. 



IS : 10087 ~ 1981 

5.1.1.7 Bonding — Any mains-connected apparatus (including solder- 
ing irons ) shouid be bonded only as described in 2.5. 

5.1.1.8 Checks on bonding — Bonding connections and any earth trip 
shouid be checked at least once a month and the check certified. 

5.1.1.9 Identification — The area should be identified by a sign visible 
clearly in the locale* 

5.1.1.10 Local instructions — A copy of this complete code of practice 
or an amplified local instruction, preferably with a layman's guide to 
static change, where personnel are likely to be non-technical, should be 
available at the SHA. 

5,1.1*11 Adjacent electrical machinery — When locating an SHA, con- 
sideration should be given to the proximity possibly concealed of machines 
such as RF generators and welding machines whose fields may adversely 
affect SHA operation. 

5.1.2 Operation 

5.1.2.1 Unpacking — Most SSDs are supplied packed in conductive 
foam or with their terminals otherwise conductively connected. They 
should be removed from this protection only immediately prior to assembly, 

5.1.2.2 Removal from packing — Before removing a device from its 
protective packing, the operator should simultaneously touch the bonded 
conductive bench top with one hand ( unless he is wearing a conductive 
and ground wrist strap ) and the conductive packing with the other hand 
in order to discharge any potential difference. Before placing the device 
in a new packing, the operator should likewise simultaneously touch the 
new packing and the bench top. 

5.1.2.3 Precautions during handling 

a) Handlers of ESDs should cultivate the habit of frequently 
touching the conductive bench top to discharge any accu- 
mulation of static charge. The routine of constantly bonding 
the assembly, the ESD packing carrier, the device itself and 
the handler should be practised whenever ESDs are being 
used. 

b) If it should become necessary to lay the device on the work- 
bench without its terminals being otherwise protectively 
shorted, it should be so placed that its terminals are in contact 
with the conductive bonded bench top till the moment of 
assembly. 

8 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

c) In unpacking the device, the terminals should not be allowed 
to come into contact with any plastic outer container. 

d) A static-sensitive device should never be handled by its leads. 

e) ESDs should never be mixed with other devices in kit marshal- 
ling and should always be kept separate. 

5.1.2.4 Electrical testing — For electrical testing, insertion into a test 
socket should precede removal of any shorting wire or foam. If the presence 
of the latter blocks insertion, an intermediate stage of more compact lead 
shorting may be employed. On completion of testing, the original shorting 
wire or foam should be replaced before unplugging the device. At ail times, 
therefore, the device should be either protectively shorted, or in circuit. 

5.1.3 Operatives — Personnel handling ESDs should wear outer clothing 
which will not generate a static charge. Cotton or linen is preferred; wool 
frequently contains man-made fibres as well, and should, therefore, be 
avoided. The use of fibre-rejuvenators in cleaning such garments is depre- 
cated. Nylon or dust-coats should not be worn. Gloves, finger-stalls or 
coats, other than of cotton or conductive plastic, should not be worn. 

5.2 Type 2 

5.2.1 Electrically Conductive Air — In this type of SHA, the air surrounding 
devices or assembly work is deliberately made and maintained electrically 
conducting, either by ionization or by controlled humidification. 

5.2.2 Ionization — Ionized air ( for example, from a corona discharge ) 
is provided to prevent or eliminate any random charges on the devices 
or assemblies during those periods when other protection is intentionally 
removed. 

5.2.2.1 The means employed to produce ionization will depend on 
local circumstances but attention is particularly drawn to the safety aspects 
and need for operator protection. 

5.2.2.2 The direction of airflow from the ionization generator should 
preferably be away from the operator across the work area. 

5.2.3 Humidification — By suitable use of humidifiers, a constant flow 
of damp air at relative humidity between 60 and 80 percent is provided 
across the work area. 

It is essential that shorting arrangements are restored to the devices 
or assemblies on completion of work in the SHA. 

Note — This method is not suitable where Unsealed components are used. 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

6. RECEIPT AND STORAGE 

6.0 General — Handling of 'transit wrapped' and 'unpacked' electro- 
static-sensitive devices is more likely to occur in the stores area than any- 
where else in the chain of equipment manufacture, testing and use. Expertise 
in this area is frequently not technical; supervision and application of 
these procedures is, therefore, more important. 

All stores personnel should become fully acquainted with the possibility 
of the danger to devices ( NOT to themselves ) resulting from neglect of 
these procedures, and the costs incurred in their re-ordering, delivery 
time and re-entry procedures, quite apart from their item cost. 

6.1 Fittings — All metal racks in stores and their associated trays and 
boxes ( whether anti-static treated plastic or metal ) used for storage, 
kit marshalling and transport to assembly points should, at rest, be electri- 
cally bonded. ( In this case only, it is permissible to connect to the earth 
terminal of the electricity supply. ) 

Storage of ESDs should wherever possible be in the packing as received 
from the device manufacturer. If this is not possible, other containers as 
defined in 6.4.3 may be used. 

The maximum possible use should be made of adhesive warning 
labels. These should warn against mishandling of static-sensitive devices 
and assemblies using them whether in equipment manufacture, testing, 
or servicing. 

6.2 Recognition — Methods of identifying electrostatic-sensitive devices, 
particularly by different suppliers across the world, vary. Each user company 
will need to recognize such items and identify them in assembled sub-unit 
conditions and possibly even as individual components. 

6.2.1 The supplier may decide to: 

a) apply in-house identification at customer's request, 

b) employ standard symbology or labelling which should be instantly 
recognizable by all customers, 

c) apply no special visual identification but simply rely on the 
device protection being recognized. 

Arrangements should, therefore, be made by the user company to 
ensure adequate recognition at the 'Goods-Inwards' stage. 

10 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

6.2.2 Warning labels or marking required to be added, by in-house 
instruction to packaging, containers, or sub-units containing static-sensitive 
devices, should be applied at the earliest point possible in this recognition 
process. It is desirable that the label should form a seal. 

6.3 Goods Inwards Inspection — Assuming adequate transit packing 
and safe transport to the customer, goods inwards is the first point of physical 
contact between the purchasing company and the goods as despatched 
by the supplier. Accordingly, the prime protective action is 'recognition' 

{see 6.2). 

6.3.1 Action on Receipt — Any parcel, package, etc, recognised from known 
indications as containing static-sensitive devices should be taken exactly 
as wrapped when recognized to a nominated SHA for handling in an 
approved manner. In case of doubt, reference should be made to a compe- 
tent authority before unpacking. 

6.3.2 Visual Checking Against Order — Verification of quantity supplied, 
and visual checking of items ( by reference to marking, advice notes and the 
goods inwards copy of the customer's order ), should be carried out at an 
SHA. While at the SHA, the quantity and type should be marked on the 
outside of any non-transparent container. 

6.3.3 Electrical Tests — Any electrical test required at goods inwards 
should be carried out at an SHA. 

6.4 Transport ( Handling or Movement ) — Movement within a user 
factory area, for example, for unpacking and checking, quality verification, 
storage and kit marshalling, is a user responsibility and the precautions 
indicated should, be taken. 

6.4.1 Devices in Transit — Where possible, devices should be retained 
in their original transit containers after external wrapping has been removed. 

6.4.2 Division of Quantities — If, for contents separation, kit marshalling, 
or other reasons the original container, possibly with device leads shorted 
by conductive foam, needs to be discarded or supplemented, all operations 
should be carried out at an SHA. 

6.4.3 Containers — Approved containers shall be used for storage and 
transit, for example: 

a) The device manufacturer's original conductive container. Atten- 
tion should be paid to the effective life-time of the materials, 
especially in respect of the susceptibility to abrasion of certain 
anti-static treatments when applied superficially as also possible 
corrosion of metal parts, 

11 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

b) A rigid metal container, 

c) A container fully lined with conductive foam. 

d) A conductive plastic bag which completely contains and surrounds 
the ESD or the assembly incorporating it. For this purpose, 
conductive plastic film or foam not less than 0-1 mm thick is 
convenient. Film can be formed into an immediate wrap or 
formed into bags that are sealable for longer term storage. Metal, 
for example, aluminium foil, is an effective short-term expedient, 
but is liable to tearing and puncturing. 

6.4.4 Dropped Devices — If a device has been dropped, the insulated 
body or metal should be grasped with a previously electrically grounded 
hand or tool, 

7. PRECAUTIONS TO BE TAKEN DURING ASSEMBLY 

7.0 General 

7.0.1 The incorporation of electrostatic-sensitive devices into an assembly 
should take place in a special handling area (see 5), 

7.0.2 The including of ESDs should be the last operation of an assembly 
process. 

7.0.3 Packages containing ESDs should be placed on a special bench, 
and ESDs should only be removed individually when required for assembly. 

7.0.4 Tools and equipment which are not bonded should always be 
touched to the bonded bench top before use, and returned there afterwards. 

7.1 Assembly Process 

7.1.1 Immediately prior to assembly, the conductors to which ESDs 
are to be attached should be shorted and bonded. 

7.1.2 Except where it can be shown that no risk of static charge genera- 
tion can exist, the ESD terminals should all be kept shorted during assembly, 
for example, by spiral spring, clip, or conducting tape. If it is necessary to 
alter the means of shorting, the new should whenever possible be attached 
before removing the old. 

7.1.3 Once the ESDs are securely in circuit, their individual shorting 
connections may be replaced with unit-shorting ( dummy ) connectors 
applied to the terminals of the circuit assembly. The unit connectors should 
remain in position until final insertion of the assembly into the using unit, 
with possible temporary removal only for testing. The dummy connectors 

12 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

should be returned to stores from the final equipment assembly point, 
except for equipment spares items, which should be despatched with an 
explanatory note with the connectors still in position. 

Note — If layout and circuit design have produced an intrinsically electro- 
static-safe assembly, the requirements of this paragraph may be waived. 

7.1.4 Uncompleted assemblies shall be stored in an appropriate container 
(see 6.4,3 ). 

7.2 Additional Precautions 

7.2.1 Printed board conductors should not be touched. 

7.2.2 Automatic machines should be fitted with electrostatic charge 
eliminators. 

7.2.3 Equipment incorporating ESDs should not be subjected to high 
electrostatic charge. 

7.2.4 For the testing of completed assemblies, see 8. 
8. ELECTRICAL TESTING 

8.1 Inspection and Testing — Inspection and testing, whether of device, 
unit, assembly, or equipment, and any adjustments found necessary, should 
be carried out under SHA conditions. Reference should be made to 5, 6 and 7 
of this code of practice. 

8.2 Test Precautions 

8.2.1 Voltages for continuity testing in excess of 1 5V will require specific 
authorization. Tests should be carried out with a low-open-circuit-voltage 
transient-free tester, with a short-circuit current not greater than 10mA, 
since some built-in protective diodes cannot sustain a greater current. 
Care must be taken with the use of multi-range test meters, particularly 
of the latest digital type, for incoming inspection measurements, as some 
of these instruments can damage the more fragile microwave devices. 
Audible testers should never be used when ESDs are present. 

8.2.2 Voltages, other than ground potential, should not appear at the 
test socket until the device is fully inserted. 

8.2.3 The design of automatic test equipment should be such that high 
voltages do not appear at any of the socket terminations between the tests 
of the sequence. 

13 



IS : 10087 - 1981 

8.2.4 Unless specified otherwise, power supply voltages should be applied 
before signal inputs, and should be maintained until input signals have 
been removed. 

8.3 Functional Checks — When functional checks are carried out at an 
SHA, it should be remembered that the bench top is conductive. 

9. FIELD REPAIRS 

9.1 Use of SHA — If the equipment is small enough, it should be trans- 
ferred to an SHA. 

9.2 Assembly Removal Outside SHA — Where transfer of the whole 
equipment to an SHA is not possible, an assembly may be removed without 
damage by utilizing the metallic mass of the equipment as ground ( see 2.4), 
the operative discharging to the equipment any static charge which he 
may have accumulated, before touching the assembly. The removed 
assembly should then be placed in an approved container and taken to 
an SHA for any required examination. The discharge process should be 
repeated before replacing an assembly in the equipment. 

9.3 Replacement of Faulty ESDs — Replacement of a possible faulty 
ESD should always be carried out at an SHA. Faulty devices should be 
placed in conductive containers, so that faults can be investigated without 
introducing additional damage. 

9.4 Field Repairs under Emergency Conditions — In an emergency, 
and only where a properly setup SHA is not available,- any large metallic 
mass, or aluminium kitchen foil, or even a damp cardboard box, may be 
used as a working surface. It should be noted that dry conditions, for 
example, desert or forest, are particularly hazardous as regards generation 
of static charge, and require special care. 



14 



