**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13358-4 (1993) : Codes of cultural practices for aromatic 
plants. Part 4: Mentha (Japanese mint) and Mentha citrata 
(Bergamint) [PCD 18: Natural and Synthetic Fragrance 
Materials] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



ISl3358(Part4 } :1993 

2l_ _,__„ ( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

^T*T 4 *r?^ ?R%f5«^ aftT Jrwn ftrf st 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CULTIVATION OF 

AROMATIC PLANTS 

PART 4 MENTHA ARVENS/S ( JAPANESE MINT ) AND 
MENTHA CITRATA { BERGAMOT-MINT ) 



UDC 665-526-22 



® BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

September 1993 Price Gronp 1 



Natural and Synthetic Perfumery Materials Sectional Committee, PCD 18 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Natural and Synthetic Perfumery Materials Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Natural perfumery materials like essential oils, are known to vary in olfactory and other physico- 
chemical characteristics depending on different agro-climatic conditions. Working on this premise,, 
the committee had quite some time back published IS 6774 : 1972 'Classification of essential oil 
bearing aromatic plants'. This standard covers information relating to botanical identity, habitate, 
economic stage of growth, harvesting season and part of the plant used for essential oil production. 
These factors have long been recognized to govern the quality of the natural essential oils. 

Realizing the importance of endemic variations of these factors including fertilizer, irrigation, 
modern technology and appropriate agronomic practices developed through a process of evaluation 
trials at recognized cultivation centres for aromatic plants in the country, the committee decided 
to amplify these efforts directionally and prepare specific codes for good cultivation practices for 
individual aromatic plants used for essential oil production. This series of Indian Standards for 
specific aromatic plants is expected to provide guidance to prospective cultivators, producers and' 
users of the essential oils to obtain the optimum yield of the essential oil of an acceptable quality 
for the perfumery industry. 

Mentha arvensis 

The whole of oil of Mentha arvensis L. is primarily used all over the world as a raw material for 
the production of menthol. Its dementholized product which is partly exported is used in India 
for Eianufacture of menthol, liquid menthol, methone and mint terpenes by adopting appropriate 
processes and technology. The oil is used in pharmacy and also as a flavouring agent in oral care 
products like toothpastes, toothpowders and mouth washes. 

Mentha Citrata 

Oil of Mentha citrata is obtained from the fresh plants of Mentha citrata Ehrh, the so called 
*Bergamot-Mint\ The commercial cultivation of Mentha citrata crop in India is of recent 
origin, centered chiefly in Rampur and in other parts of Uttar Pradesh especially Kashipur, 
Budaun, Moradabad and Haldwani. 

The cultivation practices followed for Mfw^Afif citrata are similar to that o? Mentha arvensis and 
Mentha piperita. It is planted in the month of January and two harvests are obtained in the month 
of May-June and July-August. The physico-chemical characteristics of the oil obtained from these 
crops are different from etch other. Oil extracted from first crop is rich in linalyl acetate while in 
subsequent crops it goes down considerably. Generally oil obtained from second crop is used for 
manujfacture of linalool and linalyl acetate. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from R & D work oflCAR 
and CSIR laboratories besides State Directorates and Institutions for medicinal plants. 



IS I33S8 ( Fart 4 ) : 1993 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CULTIVATION OF 

AROMATIC PLANTS 

PART 4 MENTHA ARVENSIS (JAPANESE MINT ) AND 
MENTHA CITEATA ( BERGAMOT-MINT ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 4 ) prescribes a code of 
practice for cultivation of the aromatic plants 
for production of oil of Japanese mint botani- 
cally known as Mentha arvensis var. piperascens 
Holmes and Bcrgamot-mint botanically known 
as Mentha ciirata Ehrh. Family Labiateae. 
These are natives of Mediterranean countries 
introduced into cultivation since last two 
decades. Of these Japanese mint is cultivated 
extensively in Rampur, Moradabad and 
Barabanki districts of U.P. and terai districts of 
Punjab. The cultivation of Bergamot-mint is 
limited and scattered in Budaon in U.P. 

1.2 The requirements and methods of sampling 
and tests for oil of Mentha arvensis and Mentha 
citrata have been separately covered in 
IS 528 : 1989 and IS 13261 : 1991 respectively. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

528 : 1989 Oil oi Mentha arvensis ( second 

revision ) 

6597 : 1988 Glossary of terms relating to 

natural and synthetic perfumery 
materials ( first revision ) 

13261 : 1991 Oil oi Mentha citrata 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, definitions 
given in IS 6597 : 1988 shall apply. 

4 VARIETIES/CULTIVARS 

Mentha arvensis 

There are few varieties known into cultivation 
for Mentha arvensis like M.S. 1, M.S. 2 and 
Sivalik, etc, which produce pungent smelling oil, 
bitter in taste, rich in menthol ( 75 percent and 
over ). 

Mentha citrata 

Bergamot-mint has a common composite culti- 
var, as introduced from USA. The oil is rich 
in linalyl acetate ( 35 to 45 percent ) emitting, 
characteristic bergamot-like odour. 



5 CLIMATE AND SOIL 

These mints are very hardy plants grow in wide 
range of the climate but prefer humid tropical and 
subtropical conditions with moisture and highly 
fertile soils up to 1 000 to 1 500 m elevation. The 
crops grow well in localities receiving varying 
rainfall ( 50 to 100 cm ) and temperature 
( 38*40°C ). The crops require ample sun-shine 
with 14 hour sun-light during maturity. Frost 
is harmful. 

Organic well drained soil loam, sandy-loam to 
clay-loam in texture, with pH varying from 6 to 
8*5 produce good yields. However, clayey soils 
are unsuitable due to impeded drainage. 

6 PROPAGATION AND PLANTING 

These crops do not produce seed and are raised 
from underground parts like stolons ( and other 
vegetative parts like aerial cuttings runners, 
etc ). The stolons are produced during winter 
season and are thick juice underground stems. 
The ideal season for planting extend from 
January to February, but goes up to March 
month depending upon mean day and night 
temperature. A piece of 5 to 8 cm long fresh 
juicy stolon with 2 or more growing points is 
considered suitable for planting in rowed furrows 
at 1 to 2 cm deep. The usual spacing is 40 to 
60 cm between rows and 10 cm in the rows; it 
can vary upon the soil fertility and interculture 
implements ( tractor/bullock drawn ) used. The 
seed rate is 400 kg stolons/ha. 

7 MANURES AND FERTILIZERS 

Mentha species are leafy crops, respond favour- 
ably to higher doses of manures and particularly 
nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers. In 
general 100 to 120 kg of nitrogen, 60 kg of P2O3 
and 40 kg of K2O is recommended for medium 
soils. About 1/6 of total nitrogen, along with 
entire quantity of phosphatic and potash ferti- 
lizers is appHed at planting whereas the remain- 
ing nitrogen is divided into two equal splits and 
given as top dressing in moist soil in April and 
July months when the plants are 8 to 12 cm 
high. 

8 WEEDING AND INTER-CULTURE 

These mints maintain rows before the first harvest 
is taken and allow wheel hoe, tractor-tillers, 



1 



IS 13358 ( Part 4 ) : 1993 

bullock drawn interculture and hand hoes, 
used in rows in early growth stage. Usually two 
weeding cum hoeings are given before the first 
crop is harvested in mid June. The crop 
sprouts in a fortnight and spread all over the 
field during rainy season, forming thick growths. 
Incessant rains ( because of high soil moisture 
thick growth ) limit mechanized interculture. 
Only two or three hand weedings are possible. 
Pre-emergent use of chemical weedicides like 
Sinbar ( Terbacil ) at 1*5 kg in 800 litres of 
water/ha is recommended to control weed 
growth. 

9 IRRIGATION 

These are water loving plant and demand heavy 
irrigation during summer months when rainfall 
is not well distributed throughout the growing 
season depending upon texture of soil and pre- 
vailing temperature of the locality, these crops 
require 12 to 15 irrigations of 3 to 5 cm depth. 
A large number of shallow irrigations are found 
more productive than few deep irrigations, spaced 
at longer intervals. Drought conditions cause 
general dry look, stunted growth, yellowing and 
falling of leaves, which reduces yield. The 
second crop, harvested in October needs 2 or 3 
irrigations/month after ceasation of rains. 

10 HARVEST AND YIELD 

The crops are cut over ground as harvest when 
it commence bearing flowers. In case of Sivalik, 
proper harvest time is when crop is in full 
bloom. The mature crops possess between 0'40 
to 0*68 percent oil as fresh weight basis. The 
crop is cut 10 cm above ground level on bright 
sunny days as cloudy to rainy season tend to 
decrease the methol content as well as yield of oil 
in mints. A second cutting is taken in October. 
The first crop has leaves and stalks in equal 
proportions whereas leaves are one and a half 
times more than the stalk in the second harvest 
whenever the rains are scattered and not conti- 
nous; thus weight to weight oil yield is more 
from second harvest. The harvested crop is left 
in the field for 15 to 20 hours to allow it to wilt 
and reduce its bulk. The wilted crop is carried 
to distillation site but is not heaped in lots 
which otherwise leads to fermentation resulting 
in loss of oil yield, some time up to 50 percent. 

On an average, depending upon fertility of soil 
and crop management 10 to 15 tons of herbage 
is obtained in 2 cuttings [ the average yield of 



oil thus is 100 kg/ha for the Japanese mint crops 
and about 80 kg/ha for Bergamot-mint ( depen- 
ding upon oil content in the species ) ]. 

Usually wheat, potatoes, peas and toria follow 
mint in the winter. Elsewhere, potatoes/paddy 
or sunflower is taken in rabi followed by mint 
again. No inter crops are recommended. 

11 DISTILLATION 

Usual steam or water-steam ( hydro )■ distilla- 
tion is used and the crop is distilled in 90 
minutes. The Japanese mint oil is golden yellow, 
mobile liquid, cooling to senses and bitter in 
taste with 75 percent or over menthol. Presence 
of moisture in stored mint should be avoided as 
its presence aff*ects the stability of oil leading 
to deterioration of quality of oil. The mint oils 
are slightly acidic in nature and galvanized- 
steel drums are used for storage. 

12 DISEASES AND PESTS 

Stolon root, caused by Macrophomina phaseoli 
( Maubl ) Hobby is a serious disease affecting 
underground parts and is most common in U.P. 
region. The infected stem show brown lessions, 
turning black and later results into soft decay. 
This causes yellowing of leaves, stunted growth 
and wilting. The stem be treated with 0*1 
percent solution of suitable pesticide before 
planting. Once disease occurs, the infected 
plants be segregated, pulled and burnt. Leaf 
blight is caused by AUernaria spp. which is 
another disease known for sizeable losses for 
some years in India. It forms oval brown spots 
which coalesce and become bigger. Spraying 
of copper fungicides like cuprous oxide and 
copper oxychloride in early stages of infection, 
control the disease. 

Common termite Odontitermes obesus (Ram) 
attacks growing mint plants in drier tracts causing 
substantial losses to standing crops. Application 
of Heptachlor dust ( 13 percent) at 45 to 55 kg/ha 
or BHC ( 5 percent ) at 25 kg/ha or aldrin at 
land preparation prevent termite damage. Bihar 
has caterpillar as a serious pest of mints, causing 
extensive damage by eating away the entire 
palisade tissue between veins of most lower 
leaves. Repeated spraying of Folidole ( 0'2 
percent ) in early stage of damage bring the pest 
under control. Caterpillars of Hietographa 
nigrisigna chew up the leaves and causes holes. 
for which DDT spraying is effective. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of tht Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a icence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institutioae stablished uader ths Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary detlails, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
^rade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSrmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
iatest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard May be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference : 

Doc : No. PCD 18 (1154) 

Amendments Issued Since Pablication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams ; Manaksanstha 

( Common to all OflSces ) 

Regional OflSces : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 (331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 l37 86 26, 37 86 62 



53 38 43, 53 16 40 
53 23 84 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 | 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 {^j^ J^ \f 235 23 15 

I' 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) /632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR, 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Delhi, Indi a. 



