**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10440 (1983) : Code of practice for construction of rb 
and rbc floors and roofs [CED 13: Building Construction 
Practices including Painting, Varnishing and Allied 
Finishing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



JS: 70440- 19B3 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTJCE FOR 

CONSIRUCTiON OF RB AND 

RBC FLOORS AND ROOFS 



UDC 69025 334-2 




© Coptnghi 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MASiAK tlllAVAN, 9 BAHAIJL'R JiJlAll ZAFAH MARC 

Nt:W I>ELHI ITfXHR 



Gr 3 



W/>riV ISF3 



IS : 10440 . 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

CONSTRUCTION OF RB AND 

RBC FLOORS AND ROOFS 



Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, BDG 13 

Chairman 

Shri C. p. Malik 

C 4/38, Safdarjung Development Area, 

New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shbi p. D. Agabwal Public Works Department, Government of 

Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shri R. K. Mathub ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Subaj S. J. Bahadub Housing & Urban Development Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shbi D. R. Batltvala Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri J. R. Bhalla Indian Institute of Architects, New Delhi 

Chief Engineer ( North ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Chief Enginber ( Blbgs ), PWD, Public Works Department, Government of 
Madras Tamil Nadu, Madras 

Superintending Engineer, 
(Special Building 
Circle ), PWD, Madurai ( Alternate ) 
Chief Enginebr-cum-Addition- Public Works Department, Government of 
AL Segretart to the Rajasthan, Jaipur 

Government ( B & R ) 

Executive Engineeb 
( Designs & SpEciFiCAr 
TiON ) ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Training ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Superintending Surveyor 

OF Works ( Training ) ( Alternate ) 
Dibectob ( Architecture ), Railway Board, Ministry of Railways 
RDSO 
Joint Director ( Architec- 
ture ), RDSO ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. G. Gokhale State Bank of India, Bombay 

Shri M. Kartikayan Builders' Association of India, New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act { XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10440 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri J, S. KoHLi Engineer-in-Chief s Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 

Shri M. G. Vibmani ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. L. Kumar Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi 

Shri V, G, Patwardhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Z. Kurien Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay 

Shei G. K. Majumdar Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. S. Pasricha ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Mangal Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 

Shri M. P. Jaisingh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. V. B. Pax Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri P. Srinivasax ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Pandabe Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Deputy Chief Engineer 
( North ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Pruthi Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri T. K. Saran Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance 

Snni S.S.K MM A-L { Alternate) 
Shri K. S. Srinivasan National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sushil Kumar National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Prof C, G. Swaminathan Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

New Delhi 
Shri S. R. Tambe Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay 

Shri B, T. Unwalla Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri G. Venkatesulu Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Roads Wing ) 

Shri Prafulla Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. Sengupta 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



Floor and Roof Construction Subcommittee, BDC 13 : 11 

Convener 
Shri D. R. Batlivala Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Members 
Shri S. Adaviyappa Public Works Department, Government of 

Rajasthan, Jaipur 
ShriH. N. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. C. Ghakrabarti Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri N. C. Majumdar ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 10 ) 



IS : 10440 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

CONSTRUCTION OF RB AND 

RBC FLOORS AND ROOFS 



0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 January 1983, after the draft finalized by the Building 
Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division^Council. 

0,2 Reinforced brick and reinforced brick concrete floors and roofs are 
widely adopted, particularly in the Northern parts of the country. This 
type of construction consists of laying high strength bricks directly over 
the formwork with reinforcements in between the joints and filling up the 
joints with concrete. This type of construction has been found to be 
strong, durable and it also facilitates quick construction. However, 
investigations had established that this type of floor or roof slabs 
deteriorate rapidly due to corrosion of the reinforcements. This code has 
been prepared to provide guidance for laying of such RB and RBC slabs. 
Further, measures to prevent and protect the reinforcements from corro- 
sion have also been recommended, adoption of which would ensure 
durability and better performance of the slabs. 

0.3 This code has emerged as a result of investigations carried out and 
recommendations made by CBRI, Roorkee and covers the construction 
practices that are in general use in the country. 

0*4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10440 > 1983 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code covers the design and construction of reinforced brick 
( RB ) and reinforced brick concrete ( RBC ) floors and roofs. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1.1 Reinforced Brick Slab { RB Slab ) — Reinforced brick slab is 
particularly same as reinforced concrete slab in all its essential features 
except that brickwork is substituted partly or fully for cement concrete 
( see Fig. 1 ). 

2.1.2 Reinforced Brick Concrete Slab ( RBC Slab ) — These are reinforced 
brick slab using concrete in the joints and on the top of bricks ( see 
Fig. 1). 

3. MATERIALS 

3.1 Bricks — These shall be of at least Class 75 forRB and Class 35 for 
RBC construction and conforming to IS : 1077-1976*. Overburnt bricks 
having virtified surface shall not be used. 

3.2 Cement Concrete — Cement concrete used in filling the interstices 
in reinforced brick slabs and for providing top decking of reinforced 
brick concrete slabs shall be of grade not less than M 15 and shall 
conform to IS : 456-1978*!'. It shall contain just enough water to flow 
freely without ses^re^s^ation of the aggregates. The size of the aggregates 
may be suitably selected to suit the construction. 

3.3 Reinforcement — It shall conform to IS : 432 ( Part I )-I982t or 
IS : 1139-1966§ or IS : 1786-I979I|. Reinforcements shall be free from 
rust scale or other coating. 

3.4 Centering and Formwork — The formv/ork shall consist of timber 
or steel possessing sufficient strength so as to carry the superimposed load. 
Unless otherwise specified formwork shall consist of platforms composed 
of planks or sheets supported on runners or beams. The props and 
bracings supporting the platforms shall have sufficient lateral stability. 

♦Specification for common burnt clay building bricks ( third revision ). 

fCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). 

JSpecification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire 
for concrete reinforcement: Part I Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars {third 
revision ) , 

§Specification for hot rolled mild steeJ, medium tensiie steel ^nd high yield screrigth 
steel deformed bars for concrete reinforcements ( revised ). 

llSpecification for cold-worked steel high strength deformed bars for concrete rein- 
forcement ( revised). 



-DISTRIBUTION 
'REINFORCEMENT 



IS : 10440 - 1983 

DEPTH OF SLAB -I 




MAIN REINFORCEMENT 
lA CROSS SECTION OF RB SLAB 



K 



%...V 



. # .- •» • f . . * 



_..^,..-..-4,... 






■^> 



DISTRIBUTION 
REINFORCEMENT 




i-^^i-n. 



■6 cm 



^ . \-f ■• * • 






(^MAIN 
REINFORCEMENT 



DEPTH OF SLAB-' 



IB CROSS SECTION OF RBC SLAB 
Fig. 1 Typical RB and RBC Slab 

4. NECESSARY INFORMATION 

4.1 For the efficient construction of the work, detailed information with 
regard to the following is necessary: 

a) Size and dimensions to be covered and loading conditions; 

b) Type of supporting elements and restrictions if any to their 
arrangement; 

c) Level to which the terrace should be brought to receive floor or 
roof finish; 

d) Treatment of junctions with adjacent floors, walls, etc, 

e) Provision to be made for roof slope and other requirements for 
drainage; and 

f) Provision for fixing of services, ceilings, etc. 

4.2 All information as in 4.1 shall be made available to those who are 
responsible for laying the roof or floor. Necessary drawings and 
illustrations for preparatory work shall be given, 

4.3 Arrangements shall also be made for proper exchange of information 
between those engaged in laying the floor or roof and all others whose 
work will be affected. 



IStl04«K-I983 

5. PREPARATORY WORK 

5.1 Storage, Trans|»ort aifcd Handling of Materials — Necessary 
precautions shall be observed in storage, transport and handling of 
cement, sand, bricks and aggregates. The materials shall be stored on 
the building site in such a way as to prevent deterioration or loss of 
their structural and other essential properties ( see IS ; 4082-1977* ). 

5.2 Mixing of Cement Concrete — Cement concrete shall be prepared 
in accordance with IS : 456-1978'j'. 

5.3 Cutting and Bending of Reinforcement — Reinforcements shall 
be bent and fixed in accordance with the procedure specified in IS ; 2502- 
1 963 J, and shall not be straightened in a manner that will injure the 
material. 

5.4 Preparation of Bricks — Bricks shall be kept immersed in water 
for 4 to 6 hours and removed about 15 to 20 minutes before they are used 
so that their skin is dry when cement concrete is poured. 

6. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

6.1 The general design of RB and RBC slab shall be in accordance with 
the principles laid down in IS : 456-1978t, 

Note — It is recommended that in case of RB slabs, working stress method of 
design may be followed. 

6.1. 1 Compressive Strength of Brick Masonry — All permissible stresses 
shall be related to the compressive strength of bricks as given in Table 1 
depending upon the crushing strength of bricks. Alternatively, allowable 
stresses may be based on the results of prism test ( see Appendix B of 
IS : 1905-'1980§ ), on masonry made from masonry units and mortars 
with the same bonding arrangement as for the slab, 

6.1.2 Having determined the compressive strength^ the permissible 
stresses to be followed in the design shall be as given in Table 2. 

6.1.3 One way RB slabs with freely supported ends, shall be designed 
to resist a bending moment near midspan of WL/8, where W is the total 
uniformly distributed load over the span and L is the effective span. For 
slabs continuous over supports and for slabs spanning in two directions 
at right angles, bending moment shall be calculated as given in IS : 456- 
1978t. 

6.1.4 RBC slab shall be designed in the same way as RCC slab as 
given in IS : 456-19781. 

•Recommendations and stacking and storage of construction materials at site {Jirst 
revision ). 

fCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). 

JCode of practice for bending and fixing of bars for concrete reinforcement. 

§Code of practice for structural safety of buildings; Masonry walls ( second revision ). 

6 



IS : 10440 - 1983 

Note — A continuous RBC slab at the support shall be designed like a RB slab and 
the bottom reinforcement shall be continued over the support. Reinforcement for 
taking negative moment over the support shall be provided in the top concrete. 

6.2 Reinforcement 

6.2.1 Design — The reinforcement in RB and RBC slabs shall be 
designed according to the provision of IS : 456-1978* taking the spacing 
of bricks into consideration. The reinforcement in either direction shall 
however not be less than 0*20 percent of the cross sectional area of the 
slab where plain steel bars are used and not less than 0*16 percent where 
high strength deformed bars are used. 

6.2.2 Spacing — The horizontal distance between two parallel main 
reinforcement shall not be more than three times the effective depth of 
the slab or 450 mm whichever is smaller. The pitch of the distribution 
bars shall not be more than five times the effective depth or 450 mm 
whichever is smaller. 

6.2.3 Protection Against Corrosion — Reinforcements shall be so placed 
that they do not touch bricks at any point. A minimum cover of 25 mm 
shall be provided all round the reinforcement. Further measures for 
preventing corrosion of reinforcements shall be taken as recommended in 
IS; 9077-1979t. In general, two bars shall not be used in the same 
joint. 

7. CONSTRUCTION OF REINFORCED BRICK ROOF OR 
FLOOR 

7.1 Erection of Centering and Formwork — Centering shall be 
erected to support the RB floor or roof from below. The centering shall 
be smooth, clean and to correct alignment. The top surface of formwork 
shall be given an upward camber of 1 mm for every 150 mm of span 
subject to a rhaximum of 30 mm to allow for initial settlement. Before 
laying the slab, the formwork and the supports shall be checked to 
prevent undue sag and to ensure overall safety and stability of the 
formwork. 

7.2 Detailing of Reinforcement — All main and distribution rein- 
forcement shall be placed in the position shown in Fig. 1 and shall be 
completely embeded in concrete. They shall be rigidly secured against 
any displacement and arrangement shall be made to ensure proper cover 
to the reinforcements. Splices in adjacent bars, if needed shall be 
staggered. 

7.3 Spacing of Bricks — The bricks prepared as in 5.4 shall be laid as 
shown in Fig. 1 with cement mortar 1:3. Preferably a minimum 
spacing of 60 mm in between the bricks should be maintained for 
preventing corrosion. 

*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). 
fCode of practice for corrosion protection of steel reinforcement in RB and RCC 
construction. 



IS : 10440 - 1983 



TABLE 1 COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY 

{ Clause eA A ) 



St> A%'^ePvAGs Compressive 

No, Stkeng^h of BricKj N/mm* 



CD (2) 

n> 5-Q 

iv) 10-0 

vi) 17-5 

rii> 21^ 

viii) 25-a 

ix) 28-0 

x) So'O 



Assumed Gompbessive Strength 

OF Masonry ( fm )*, N/mm^ 



r— 

With Proper 
Gontro 


Without Proper 
Control 


(3) 


(4) 


3-0 


2'0 


4-5 


3*0 


6-25 


4-25 


8-0 


5-5 


9-5 


6-5 


IVO 


7-5 


12*25 


8-25 


13-25 


9-00 


]4'0 


9-5 


15-5 


iO-5 



*In no case, assumed fm shall be gjeater than fhe average compressive strength of 
mortar or grout whichever is less. 



TABLE 2 PERMISSIBLE STRESSES 

{Clause 6.1.2) 



No. 
(I) 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 

V) 



vi) 



Typk of Stress 



(2) 



Flexural compression 

Flexural tension 

Shear ( without shear reinforcement ) 

Shear ( with shear reinforcement ) 

Bond: 

a) Plain bars 

b) Deformed bars 
Modulus of elasticity 



Permissible Stresses, N/mm* 

(3) 
0-23 fm 
0-JOfm 

0-02 fm, but shall not exceed 0*3 
0*05 fm, but shall not exceed 0*8 

0*6 

0-8 

I 000 fm but shall not exceed 
2 X 10* 



IS : 10440 - 1983 

7.4 Laying of Bricks and Reinforcements — The bricks for single 
brick thickness of floor or roof shall be laid directly on the forms without 
bedding of any kind. After one row of bricks has been laid the next row 
is similarly laid providing the gap for concrete joint. Concrete as 
prepared in 5.2 shall be then poured in the gaps to fill the bottom of the 
joint to a uniform thickness equal to the clear bottom cover to the rein- 
forcing bars. Concrete should be poured into the joints after the 
placement of reinforcement. Concrete shall be fluid enough to run 
freely around the reinforcing bars and fill the joints completely. The 
joints shall be puddled sufficiently with a trowel or a sharp ended 16 mm 
diameter rod to aid the flow of concrete to every corner and to fill any 
void space left in the joint due to entrapping of air or otherwise. A 
typical cross section of RB and RBC floor or roof is shown in Fig. 1. 
If a slab of two courses of brick is laid, a fresh layer of concrete shall be 
spaced over the first course to make the middle horizontal joints and 
screeded properly to the desired thickness of the joint. The top course 
of brick is then laid in the same manner as in the first course. 

7.5 Curing — The brickwork shall be kept wet by means of wet straw 
or wet sand or merely by sprinkling water gently over the surface for 
about 24 hours after finishing. The slab shall then be watered profusely 
and allowed to set for a period of atleast 10 days. 

7.6 Removal of Formwork — The formwork for the RB and RBC 

floor or roof shall not be removed before 14 days after laying. 

7.7 Finishing — The completed floor or roof shall be further finished 
with a waterproofing course of lime concrete ( see IS : 3036-1980* ) or 
MUD PHUSKA with tiles ( see IS : 2115-1980t ). The ceiling shall be 
rendered or plastered after drying with cement mortar (1:3) or lime 
mortar (1:2) as specified. The plaster may be in a single coat o£ 
12 mm thick, and shall be done in accordance with IS : 1661-1972}. The 
finished surface of the floor or roof shall be cured with water for a period 
of not less than 3 weeks. 

8. INSPECTION 

8,1 Inspection shall be done at every stage to avoid unsatisfactory work. 



♦Code of practice for laying lime concrete for a waterproofed roof finish (frst 
revision ). 

fCode of practice for flat-roof finish, MUD PHUSKA ( second revision ). 

{Code of practice for application of cement and cement-lime plaster finish (^r^^ 
revision ). 



iS t 10440 - 1983 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. Devarajak Engineer-in-Chlef 's Branch, Army HeadquarterSj 

New Delhi 
Maj V. K. Anand ( Alternate } 
Deputy Chief Engineeh Railway Board, Ministry of Railways 

( General ) Southern 
Railway, Madras 
Shri Y. R, Khibwadkab Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay 

Shri F. B. PiTHAVAmAN ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. L. Kumar Institution oi Surveyors, New Delhi 

Shri G. K. Majumdar Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. S. Fashicha ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. S. Moitra Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shri B. V. B. Pai Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shri P. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Rajappa Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay 

Du M. Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre ( GSIR ), 

Madras 
Shri Z. Ueobge ( Alternate ) 
Senior Deputy Chief En^oineer Public Works Department, Government of 
( Bldgs ) Tamil Nadu, Madras 

ExECUTivK Engineer 
( Planning ) ( Alternate ) 
Shrt K. S. Srinivasan National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shbj Sashi Kant ( Alternate ) 
SapERiNTENDiNG ENGINEER Public Works Department, Government of 

( RoABS & Bldgs ) Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad 

Surveyor of Works, Madras Central Public Works Department, Madras 
Centre Circle 



10 



