**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 14774-2 (2000) : Resistance Trace Heating in Potentially 
Explosive Atmospheres, Part 2: Informative Application 
Guide for Design, Installation and Maintenance [ETD 22: 
Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmosphere] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | *ft ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

UJTtfZT JJpfZF (Reaffirmed 2005) 

^mrf^cT fa^d* <lkll<HU| *f f^TcT ^M 

o 
WT 2 R^m, U^IMH 3?k T??T-T??fT^ % t>H£ ^MlrH* 3R3^TTTT STPWNrTl 

Indian Standard 

ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE TRACE HEATING IN 
POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

PART 2 INFORMATIVE APPLICATION GUIDE FOR DESIGN, 
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 



ICS 29.260.20 



© BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 



April 2000 Price Group 9 



Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee, ETD 22 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmospheres Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

This standard (Part 2) is one of the series of Indian Standards which provides guidance for applications of 
electrical resistance trace heating systems in areas where potentially explosive atmospheres may be present. 

The series comprises of the following two parts: 

Part 1 General and testing requirements 

Part 2 Informative application guide for design, installation and maintenance 

In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from Doc. 3 1/283/CDV circulated by the 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



Indian Standard 



ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE TRACE HEATING IN 
POTENTIALLY EXPLOSIVE ATMOSPHERES 

PART 2 INFORMATIVE APPLICATION GUIDE FOR DESIGN, 
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 



1 SCOPE 

This standard (Part 2) provides guidance for the 
application of electrical resistance trace heating 
systems in areas where potentially explosive 
atmospheres may be present. 

It provides recommendations for the design, 
installation and maintenance of trace heating 
equipment and associated control and monitoring 
equipment. 

This part supplements the requirements specified in 
IS 14774 (Part 1). 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts 
to this standard: 



IS No. 
5571 : 1981 



5572 : 1994 



14774 (Part 1) : 
2000 



Title 

Guide for selection of electrical 
equipment for hazardous areas 

Classification of hazardous areas 
(other than mines) having 
flammable gases and vapours for 
electrical installation (second 
revision) 

Electrical resistance trace heating 
in potentially explosive 
atmospheres: Part 1 General and 
testing requirements 



3 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 14774 (Part 1) shall apply. 

4 APPLICATION CONSIDERATIONS 

4.1 General 

Where trace heating systems are to be installed in 
potentiallly explosive atmospheres, full details of the 
hazardous area classification(s), IS 5572, should be 
specified. The specification should state the zone of 
risk (1 or 2), gas group (IIA, IIB or IIC) and 



temperature classification in accordance with 
IS 5571 . Where special considerations apply or where 
site conditions may be especially onerous, these 
conditions should be detailed in the trace heating 
specification. 

Where trace heating systems are to be installed on 
mobile equipment, or interchangeable skid units, the 
specification for these trace heating systems should 
be designed to accommodate the worst conditions 
that the trace heating system may be used in. Where 
any parts of the trace heating system may be exposed 
to ultra violet radiation those parts should be suitable 
for use in such conditions. 

4.2 Corrosive Areas 

All components of electric trace heating systems 
should be examined to verify that they are compatible 
with any corrosive material that may be encountered 
during the lifetime of the system. Trace heating 
systems operating in corrosive environments may have 
a higher potential for failure than in non-corrosive 
environments. Deterioration of the thermal insulation 
system is made worse by corrosion of the weather 
barrier and the possibility of pipeline and vessel leaks 
soaking the thermal insulation. Particular attention 
should be given to the materials of piping systems, 
as well as the electric trace heating systems, as related 
to the effective earth leakage/ground fault return path. 
The use of non-metallic or hybrid piping systems 
may further complicate the earth leakage/ground fault 
return path and special consideration should be given 
to these piping systems. Earth leakage/ground fault 
return paths that are established at the time of 
installation may become degraded due to corrosion 
during the operation of the plant. 

4.3 Installation Considerations 

For convenience, various process types, according to 
the degree of application criticality and process 
temperature accuracy required, may be specified (see 
Table 1). However, it should be recognized that each 
specific application may involve a combination of 
considerations. 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

Table 1 Process Types 

(Clause 4.3) 

Process Type 
Application Criticality Process Temperature Accuracy Required 



r 

Above a 


Within a 


Within 


Minimum 


Moderate 


a Narrow 


Point 


Band 


Band 


Type 1 


Type 11 


Type III 



Critical (C-) 
Non-critical (NC-) 



C-l 

NC-I 



C-II 
NC-II 



c-m 

NC-IIl 



Type C — are critical applications; Type NC — are non-critical 
applications. 

When the trace heating is critical to the process, 
consideration should be given to circuit monitoring 
heating circuits should be monitored for correct 
operation and alarms provided to indicate damage or 
fault and to back up (redundant) heating systems. 

Spare or back up trace heating controls may be 
specified to be automatically activated in the event of 
a fault being indicated by the monitoring/alarm 
system. This sometimes known as 'redundance'. Back 
up trace heating allows maintenance and repairs to 
be performed without a process shutdown. 

4.4 Process Temperature Accuracy 

4.4.1 Type I 

A Type I process is one for which the temperature 
should be maintained above a minimum point. 
Ambient sensing control may be acceptable. Large 
block of power may be controlled by means of a 
single control device and a panel board. Heat input 
may be provided unnecessarily at time and wide 
temperature excursions should be tolerable. Energy 
efficiency may be improved through the use of dead 
leg control techniques (see 6.13). 

4.4.2 Type II 

A Type II process is one for which the temperature 
should be maintained within a moderate band. 
Pipeline sensing mechanical thermostats may be 
typical. 

4.4.3 Type III 

A Type III process is one for which the temperature 
should be controlled within a narrow band. Pipe 
sensing controllers using thermocouple or resistance- 
temperature detector (RTD) units facilitate field (work 
site) calibration and provide maximum flexibility in 
the selection of temperature alarm and monitoring 
functions. Heat input capability may be provided to 
melt or raise the fluid temperature, or both, within a 
specified range and time interval. Type III 
considerations require strict adherence to flow patterns 
and thermal insulation systems. 



5 THERMAL INSULATION 

5.1 General 

The selection, installation and maintenance of the 
thermal insulation should be considered a key 
component in the performance of an electrical trace 
heating system. The thermal insulation system is 
normally designed to prevent the majority of heat 
loss with the trace heating system compensating for 
the remainder. Therefore problems with the thermal 
insulation will have a direct impact on the overall 
system performance. 

The primary function of thermal insulation is to 
reduce the rate of heat transfer from a surface that is 
operating at a temperature other than ambient. This 
reduction of energy loss may: 

- reduce operating expenses; 
improve system performance; and 

- increase system output capability. 

Prior to any heat loss analysis for an electrically traced 
pipeline, vessel or other mechanical equipment, a 
review of the selection of the insulation system is 
recommended. The principal areas for consideration 
are as follows: 

- selection of an insulation material; 

- selection of a weather barrier (cladding); 
selection of the economic insulation thickness; 
and 

- selection of the proper insulation size. 

5.2 Selection of Insulating Material 

The following are important aspects to be considered 
when selecting an insulation material: 

thermal characteristics; 

- mechanical properties; 

- chemical compatibility; 

- moisture resistance; 

- personnnel safety characteristics; 

- fire resistance; 

- smoke, toxicity; and 
cost. 

Insulation materials commonly available include: 

- expanded silica; 

- mineral fibre; 

- cellular glass; 

- urethane; 

- fibreglass; 

- calcium silicate; 
isocyanurate; and 

- perlite silicate. 

For soft insulants (mineral fibre, fibre glass, etc), 
actual pipe-size insulation may be used in many cases 
by banding the insulation tightly. Care should be 
taken to prevent the heater from being buried within 
the insulation, which may cause damage to the heater 



or may restrict proper heat transfer. As an alternative, 
the next larger pipe-size insulation that can easily 
enclose pipe and electric trace heater is also 
acceptable. Rigid insulation (calcium silicate, 
expanded silica, cellular glass, etc), may be pipe-size 
insulation if board sections cut to fit the longitudinal 
joint are used. This type of installation technique is 
commonly referred to as an extended- leg installation. 
Alternatively, the next larger insulation size may be 
selected to accommodate the trace heater. In all cases, 
the insulation size and thickness should be clearly 
specified. 

5.3 Selection of Weather Barrier (Cladding) 

Proper operation of an electrically trace heated system 
depends upon the insulation being dry. Electric tracing 
norma!! v has insufficient heat output to jdP' wet 
thermal insulation. Some insulation materials, £ven 
though removed from the piping and force dried, 
never regain their initial characteristics after once 
being wet. 

Straight piping may be weather protected with metal 
jacketing, polymeric, or a mastic system. When metal 
jacketing is used, it should be smooth with formed, 
modified 'S' longitudinal joints. The circumferential 
end joints should be sealed with closure bands and 
supplied with sealant on the outer edge or where 
they overlap. 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

Jacketing, that is, overlapped or otherwise closed 
without sealant is not effective as a barrier to moisture. 
A single unsealed joint can allow a considerable 
amount of water to leak into the insulation during a 
rainstorm. 

The type of weather-barrier used should, as a 
minimum, be based on a consideration of the 
following: 

effectiveness in excluding moisture; 

- corrosive nature of chemicals in the area; 

- fire protection requirements; 

- durability to mechanical abuse; and 

- cost. 

5.4 Selection of the Economical Thickness 

At a minimum, an economic consideration of the 
insulation will weigh the initial costs of the materials 
and installation against the energy saved over the 
life of the insulation. It should be noted that the 
actual insulation thicknesses do not always correspond 
exactly to the nominal insulation thickness. When 
choosing the insulation size, considerations should 
be made as to whether or not the actual pipe-size 
insulation is suitable for accommodating both pipe 
and trace heater. 



METAL JACKET 




\ 



SECTION A-A \ — INSULATION 

METAL JACKET INSULATED PIPE 



PIPE 




MOVEMENT 



INSULATION 



Fig.1 Thermal Insulation: Weather-Barrier Installation 

3 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

5.5 Double Insulation 

The double insulation technique may be employed 
when the pipe temperature exceeds the maximum 
allowable temperature of the trace heater. Prevention 
of the freezing of condensate in high temperature 

ctpam lin^Q u/hpn th/*cp Hn**c arp nr\t in ncp ic a tvmrn! 
tji~».ii »»»,~n .,..-.. ,...^~ ...,~- «.* ,.~- ... „ — .« „ v ^.„„. 

application. It consists of locating the trace heater 
between two layers of insulation surrounding the pipe. 
The essence of the double-insulation technique is to 
determine the correct combination of inner-and outer- 
insulation type and thickness that will result in an 
acceptable interface temperature for the trace heater. 
This relationship is illustrated in Fig. 2. It may be 
noted that maximum ambient temperature conditions 
should be considered in this determination. 

6 SYSTEM DESIGN 

6.1 Introduction 

When designing trace heating systems for use in 
potentially explosive atmospheres, additonal 
constraints are imposed due to the requirements and 
classification of the area under consideration. The 



design of any trace heating system should conform to 
all requirements for the use of electrical equipment 
in these areas and with the requirements of this 
standard. 

Each process imposes unique demands on the designer 
in order to achieve the ues\reu temperature anu 
maintain it within the specified conditions. Trace 
heating systems necessarily interface with other 
specified items of equipment such as thermal 
insulation and the electrical supply available to power 
the system. The final system will be an integration of 
all these component parts so the values of these 
interface items have to be known and controlled in 
order to design systems that will perform as required. 
Local ambient temperature data, both maxima and 
minima, have to be known and incorporated into the 
design. 

Consideration should be given to maintenance of the 
systems and of the process equipment; to energy 
efficiency, and to testing the installed systems for 
operational satisfaction and safety. 




PIPE 



INNER INSULATION LAYER 



HEAT TRACER 

OUTER INSULATION LAYER 
METAL FOIL (ALUMINIUM) 



OUTER INSULATION SURFACE 

TEMPERATURE 

AMBIENT 
TEMPERATURE 



RADIUS 



Fig. 2 Typical Temperature Profile 
4 



6.2 Purpose of, and Major Requirement for, Trace 
Heating 

Trace heaters should be selected and installed such 
as to provide sufficient power for: 

a) compensation of heat losses when maintaining 
a specified temperature of a workpiece (no 
heat exchange is assumed with the workpiece 
or its contents), see calcualtion method in 
6.3, and/or; 

b) raising the temperature of a workpiece, and 
its content when specified, with a specified 
value to be established within a specified 
period, see calculation method in 6.4; 

c) a combination of (a) and (b). 

It should be observed that heat losses established in 
accordance with 6.3 and 6.4 should be multiplied by 
a safety factor determined on the basis of 6.5. The 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

excess of installed power over the power as required 
and the way in which trace heaters are applied, 
installed and operated shall not be the cause, not 
even after evaluation of worst case conditions, to any 
unacceptable risk in a potentially explosive area. 

6.3 Heat Loss Calculations 

To determine heat losses for a given set of conditions, 
a complete insulation specification is required, 
including details of the thermal conductivity of the 
insulation at several mean temperatures, the type of 
weather-barrier specified, insulation size and 
thickness, desired workpiece maintenance tempera- 
ture, and the minimum ambient temperature and wind 
conditions. 

For example given these calculation. For example; 
the heat loss for pipes and tubes may be evaluated by 
the following equation: 



where 
<7 



(L-T 3 ) 



1 | in (D 2 /D l ) | fn(£) 3 /P 2 ) ^ 1_ 

7lD,/7i 271 A", 271 # 2 



.(Eqn. 1) 



71 A,/? 

J r.i 



^D,h 



is the heat loss per unit length of pipe 
(W/m); 



T is the desired maintenance temperature (°C); 

T a is the minimum design ambient temperature 
(°C); 

D, is the inside diameter of the inner insulation 
layer (m); 

D 2 is the outside diameter of the inner insulation 
layer (m); 

(inside diameter of the outer insulation layer 
when present); 

D 3 is the outside diameter of the outer insulation 
layer when present (m); 

K l is the thermal conductivity of the inner layer 
of insulation evaluated at its mean temperature 
(W/m K); 

K 2 is the thermal conductivity of the outer layer 
of insulation, when present, evaluated at its 
mean temperature (W/m 2 K); 

h x is the inside air contact coefficient from the 
pipe to the inner insulation surface when 
present (W/m 2 K); 

h m is the inside air contact coefficient from the 
outer insulation surface to the weather-barrier 
when present (W/m 2 K); 

h is the outside air film coefficient from the 



weather barrier to ambient (W/m 2 K) (typical 
values for this term range from 3 W/m K to 
284 W/m K for low temperature applications 
below 50°C. 

Vessel heat losses are more complex due to the heat 
sinks that penetrate the insulation surface. They often 
require a more complex analysis to determine total 
heat loss and the trace heating supplier should be 
consulted. 

For ease of product selection, most trace heating 
suppliers will furnish simple charts and graphs of 
heat losses for variously maintained temperatures and 
insulations, which usually include a safety factor. 

A simplified version of Eqn. 1, expressing heat loss 
per unit length, is: 



= 2nK(T p ~T a ) 

q In (D 2 /D,) 
6.4 Heat-up Considerations 



...(Eqn. 1A) 



In certain plant operations, it may be necessary to 
specify that the trace heating system is capable of 
raising the temperature of a static product within a 
certain time period. For example, the heat-delivery 
requirement of a trace heated system on piping may 
be evaluated by use of the following equation: 



/ = //! 



g e -U(T t -T a ) 



P\Wt 



■V(J X -TJ 

...(Eqn. 2) 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

where 

U is heat loss per unit length of pipe per degree 
of temperature difference 

(T v -T a ) 



where 
H 



H 
and 

P 2 



c3 

T 



T 

a 

T 

p 

t 
U 

H 
D, 



7t'D,/7j 



| ln(Z) 2 /D,) t In (D 3 /D 2 ) | 

2ti a:, 2n k 2 



1 



(see Eqn. 1) 



is the thermal time constant, which is the total 
energy stored in the mass of pipe, fluid, and 
insulation per degree of temperature divided 
by the heat loss per unit length per degree 
temperature differential. 

p x c pl v c ,+p 2 c p2 y t2+ 05P 3 c p3 v e3 (Eqn 3) 
u 



s the density of product in pipe (kg/m 3 ); 

s the specific heat of the product (J/kg K); 

s the internal volume of pipe (m 3 /m); 

s the density of pipe (kg/m 3 ); 

s the specific heat of the pipe (J/kg K); 

s the pipe wall volume (mVm); 

s the density of insulation (kg/m 3 ); 

s the specific heat of the insulation (J/kg K); 

s the insulation wall volume (m 3 /m); 

s the initial temperature of the pipe (°C); 

s the final temperature of the fluid and pipe 
:°C); 

s the ambient temperature (°C); 

s the desired maintenance temperature (°C); 

s the desired heat up time (s); 

s the heat loss per unit length of pipe per 
degree of temperature ( W/m K); 

s the thermal time constant (s); 

s the thermal conductivity of the inner 
nsulation evaluated at its mean temperature 
(W/m K); 

s the thermal conductivity of the outer 
nsulation evaluated at its mean temperature 

(W/m K); 

s the outside diameter of outer insulation layer 
(m); 

s the outside diameter of the inner insulation 
layer (m); 



7C D 3 /* co 71 D 3 /? 



D, 



is the inside diameter of the insulation layer 
(m); 
h is the inside air contact coefficient of the 

CO 

weather-barrier (W/m 2 K); 
h is the outside air contact coefficient of the 

o 

weather-barrier to the ambient (W/m 2 K); 

h is the inside air contact coefficient from pipe 
to the inside insulation surface (W/m 2 K); 

T is the temperature at which phase change 
occurs (°C); 

h f is the latent heat of fusion for the product 
(J/kg); and 

g c is the output of the trace heater(s) (W/m). 

The preceding relationships also assume that system 
densities, volumes, thermal conductivities, and heat 
losses are constant over the temperature range of 
interest. Note that some products do not undergo a 
phase change during heat up. Although the model is 
representative of a straight pipeline, it does not have 
provisions for equipment such as pumps and valves. 

Insulation for valves, flanges, pumps, instruments, 
and other irregularly shaped equipment may be 
constructed for the particular configuration. This can 
be fabricated from block, insulation segments, or 
flexible removable covers. 

Uninsulated or partially insulated pipe supports or 
equipment require additional heat input to compensate 
for the higher heat loss. Insulating cements or fibrous 
materials should be used to fill cracks and joints. 
Where insulating cements are used for total insulation 
of an irregular surface, a proportionally thicker layer 
of cement may be applied to achieve the desired 
insulating capability. 

6.5 Heat Loss Design Safety Factor 

Since heat loss calculations result in theoretical values 
and do not account for imperfections associated with 
actual work site installations, a safety factor should 
be applied to the calculated values. The calculated 
safety factor should be based upon past experience 
and typically will range from 10 per cent to 25 per 
cent. The addition of a safety factor is used to 
compensate for tolerances in the trace heating system. 
These tolerances are generally connected with the 
efficiency of the thermal insulation system, the voltage 
supply and the characteristics of the heaters. 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



6.6 Selection of Trace Heater 

For a particular application there are some basic 
design requirements which may determine the choice 
of trace heater(s). 

These are as follows: 

a) The trace heaters should be certified for use in 
potentially explosive atmospheres; 

b) The maximum withstand temperature of the 
trace heaters should be greater than the 
maximum possible workpiece temperature 
(which may be greater than the normal 
operating temperature); and 

c) The trace heaters should be suitable for 
operation in the environmental conditions 
specified, for example, a corrosive atmosphere 
or a low ambient temperature. 

NOTE — Any change to certified apparatus may invalidate the 
certificate. 

For any application there is a maximum allowable 
power density at which a trace heater can be used 
without damaging either the workpiece or its contents. 
Sometimes this value is particularly critical, such as 
with lined pipes, vessels containing caustic soda or 
with heat sensitive materials. This limiting value has 
to be recorded in the system documentation. Multiple 
tracing or spiralling of a single trace heater may be 
required. The choice of trace heater may be further 
limited by whether fabrication on site is possible. 
Site fabricated trace heaters may be permissible 
provided that: 

a) installation personnel are competent in the 
special techniques required. 

b) the trace heater(s) pass the field (site work) 
tests specified in 8.5.2. 

c) the trace heater(s) is/are marked in accordance 
with 6.3 of IS 14774 (Part 1). 

Trace heater(s) not excluded by the above 
considerations are technically suitable for the 
application, but it is still necessary to determine the 
maximum allowable power density of each. 

This is a function of the construction, the maximum 
withstand temperature, the required temperature 
classification of the trace heater, the maximum 
operating temperature and maximum permissible 
temperature of the workpiece and thermal insulation. 

For each particular trace heater the maximum 
allowable power density should be determined from 
the manufacturer's data which are based on tests 
specified in 5 of IS 14774 (Part 1). The value used 
should be chose so that neither the maximum 
withstand temperature nor the required temperature 



classification is exceeded. The limiting value of 
maximum allowable power density for each trace 
heater is either the value chosen from the 
manufacturer's data or that specified for the process, 
whichever is the lower. However, the power density 
may be further limited by the need for multiple 
tracing. 

The designer may then select the type, length or size 
and loading of the trace heater. The actual installed 
load should be not less than the design loading and 
the actual power density not greater than that obtained 
above. The type of trace heater and the values of 
installed load and power density should be recorded 
in the system documentation. 

6.7 Maximum Temeprature Determination 

6.7.1 Maximum Workpiece Temperature: 
Stabilized Design 

For a stabilized design the maximum possible pipe 
temperature is calculated at maximum ambient 
temperature with the trace heater continuously 
energized. The formula for calculating the maximum 
potential pipe temperature is a re-arrangement of the 
terms of the heat loss formula which is as follows: 



T = 



where 



W 



DA 



, ln(Pz/P|) , 
2k 



1 



1 



A/> co 



+ 71 



D,h 
...(Eqn. 4) 



T r is the maximum calculated pipe temperature 
(°C); 

NOTE — The maximum process pipe temperature may exceed 
the calculated value. 

W is the trace heater output (W/m) corrected for 
110 percent rated voltage and maximum 
manufacturer's output tolerance; and 

k is the thermal conductivity of the insulation at 
its mean temperature (W/m K). 

Other terms are defined in 6.3, Eqn. 1. Iterative 
techniques may need to be applied to the calculation 
of Eqn. 4 in order to arive at T ' since the thermal 
conductivity of the insulation and the heating cable 
output may be a function of pipe temperature. 

6.7.2 Sheath Temperature: Metallic Applications 

For metallic pipe or vessel applications, the sheath 
temperature of a trace heater should be considered to 
the extent that product ratings are not to be exceeded 
in the application. This includes not only the electrical 
insulation and sheath materials, but also the maximum 
temperature limitations of the thermal insulation and 
pipe wall material or process material. The maximum 
sheath temperature of a trace heater may be deter- 



7 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

mined by product testing or using the system approach 
as described in 5.1.10 of IS 14774 Part 1 . The sheath 
temperature of a trace hearer is as follows: 



7;.,=- 



W 

Tr in 

uc 



+ z 



pm 



where 



^ is the trace heater sheath temperature (°C); 
C is the trace heater circumference (m); 

is overall heat transfer coefficient (W/m 2 K); 



U 



W m is the trace heater output (W/m) at the 
maximum pipe temperature as defined below 
at 110 percent rated voltage and maximum 
output tolerance (declared by the 
manufacturer); and 

T m is the maximum pipe temperature (°C). 

The overall heat transfer coefficient is different for 
each trace heater type, installation method, and system 
configuration. It is a combination of conductive, 
convective, and radiation heat transfer modes. The 
value of U can vary from 2.2 for cylindrical heating 
cable in air (primarily convective), to 30 or more for 
a trace heater applied using heat transfer aids 
(primarily conductive). Upon request, the trace heating 
supplier should provide the ^/-factor for given 
applications, or furnish calculated or perimentally 
determined sheath temperatures. 

The power output (W ) of the trace heater selected 
should provide the stabilized design and should not 
exceed the temperature classification or any other 
maximum temperature limitations listed above. 

6.7.3 Sheath Temperature: Non-Metallic 
Applications 

For non-metallic pipe applications, the pipe wall 
thermal resistance should be considered, as the non- 
metallic pipe is a poor heat transfer medium. These 
materials may have a thermal conductivity (^-factor) 
1/200 that of steel, and a substantial temperature 
difference may develop across the pipe or tank wall 
depending on the heating cable power density. This 
higher than normal temperature (when compared to 
tracing metallic pipes and vessles) may have two 
adverse effects. 

a) The non-metallic pipe maximum allowable 
temperature may be exceeded. 

b) The trace heater maximum allowable tempera- 
ture may be exceeded. 

Sheath temperature of the trace heater under normal 
operating conditions is in principle obtained from 
Eqn. 5. However, in obtaining U, the effect of the 
thermal resistance of the pipe wall should be included. 



The overall heat transfer coefficient for plasltic pipe 
is 



_L-_L 

U P ~ u, 



...(Eqn. 6) 



...(Eqn. 5) where 



U is the overall heat transfer coefficient for non- 
metallic pipe (W/m 2 K); 

U is the overall heat transfer coefficient for 

m 

metallic pipe (W/m 2 K); 

L is the pipe wall thickness (m); and 

k is the thermal conductivity of pipe wall material 
(W/m K). 

Because of the additional thermal resistance of the 
non-metallic pipe wall, a temperature difference will 
exist across the pipe wall; that is, the outside pipe 
wall and fluid temperature are not the same as in the 
case of metallic pipe. Therefore, fluid temperature 
should be considered. For non-metallic pipe, then 



71k 



W 

~Up~C 



+ T f 



.(Eqn. 7) 



where 



T f is the fluid temperature (°C). 

Equation 7 is a conservative simplification of a 
complex problem that involves criteria beyond the 
scope of this standard. The individual trace heating 
manufacturers should provide sheath temperature data 
for specific applications. The power output of the 
trace heater selected should provide the stabilized 
design and should not exceed the temperature 
classification or any other maximum temperature 
limitations. 

6.8 Design Information 

6.8.1 Design Information Documentation 

To ensure a workable trace heating design, the design 
function should be furnished with up-to-date piping 
information and should be notified of any revisions 
of items and drawings that pertain to the trace heating 
system. 

Any or all of the following may be applicable: 

— thermal design parameters; 

— system flow diagram; 

— equipment layout drawings (plans, sections, 
etc); 

— pipe drawings (plans, isometrics, line lists, etc); 

— piping specifications; 

— thermal insulation specifications; 

— equipment detail drawings (pumps, valves, 
strainers, etc); 



- electrical drawings (one lines, elementaries, 
etc); 

- bill of materials; 

- electrical equipment specifications; 

- equipment installation and instruction 
manuals; 

- equipment details; 

- thermal insulation schedules; 

- area classification documentation; 

- ignition temperature of gas or vapour involved; 
and 

- process procedures that would cause elevated 
pipe temperatures, that is, steam out or 
exothermic reactions. 

6.8.2 Isometric or Heater Configuration Line Lists 
and Load Charts 

Each heater circuit should be shown on a drawing 
depicting its physical location, configuration, and 
relevant data for the trace heating and its piping 
system. The drawing and/or design data should 
include the following information: 

a) piping system designation; 

b) pipe-size and material; 

c) piping location or line number; 

d) trace heater designation or circuit number; 

e) location of power connection, end seal, and 
temperature sensors as applicable; 

f) trace heater number; and 

g) design data such as the following: 

1) temperature to be maintained; 

2) maximum process temperature; 

3) minimum ambient temperature; 

4) maximum exposure temperature (when 
applicable); 

5) maximum sheath temperature (when 
required); 

6) heat-up parameters (when required); 

7) length of piping; 

8) trace ratio of trace heater per length of pipe; 

9) extra length of trace heater applied to valves, 
pipe supports, and other heat sinks; 

10) length of trace heater; 

11) operating voltage; 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

12) watts per unit length of trace heater at 
desired maintenance temperature; 

1 3) heat loss at desired maintenance temperature 
per unit length of pipe; 

14) watts, total; 

15) circuit current, start-up and steady state; 

16) thermal insulation type, nominal size, 
thickness, and ^-factor; 

17) area classification, including the lowest 
ignition temperature for each area (if 
applicable); 

18) bill of material. 

The drawing should also indicate the power 
distribution panel number or designation, the alarm 
and control equipment designation, and set points. 

6.9 Power System 

The trace heater branch circuit protection should be 
capable of interrupting high impedance earth faults, 
as well as short-circuit faults {see 4.4 of IS 14774 
(Part 1)]. This should be accomplished by an earth 
fault equipment protective device with a nominal 
30 mA trip rating or a controller with earth fault 
interruption capability for use in conjunction with 
suitable circuit protection. The trip level for adjustable 
devices is typically set at 30 mA above any inherent 
capacitive leakage characteristic of the heater as 
specified by the trace heating supplier. Where condi- 
tions of maintenance and supervision ensure that only 
qualified persons will service the installed systems, 
and continued circuit operation is necessary for the 
safe operation of the equipment or processes, earth 
fault detection without interruption is acceptable if 
alarmed in a manner to assure an acknowledged 
response. 

6.10 Start-up at Low Ambient Temperatures 

When trace heating systems are started at very low 
ambient temperatures there may be initial current 
surges which could cause nuisance tripping on current 
protective devices. The rating and characteristics of 
current protective devices should be appropriate for 
the trace- heating systems where low ambient start up 
conditions may occur. Refer to the trace heating 
supplier's instructions for additional details and 
recommendations in these cases. 

6.11 Long Cable Runs 

When parallel circuit trace heaters are used in long 
runs, the power density at the end of the run can be 
less than the power density at the beginning due to 
voltage drop. This should be taken into considerations 
when determining trace heater output and the location 
of temperature sensors. 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

6.12 Flow Pattern Analysis 

Where critical temperature control is required, all 
possible flow conditions in the piping network should 
be considered in determining the trace heating circuit 
segments. This is illustrated by the heated tank 
example shown in Fig. 3. AH three trace heating 
circuits with separate controls are necessary to 
maintain the piping system at its desired maintenance 
temperature. When the heated product flows from 
the tank through pipe A, circuit No. 1 and circuit 
No. 2 are de-energized, and circuit No. 3, which is 
heating the non-flowing line, remains energized. 

If all three circuits are combined into one, using only 
one control, the non-line A or B is de-energized and 



drops below the desired maintenance temperature. 

A bypass around a control valve is another common 
occurrence where additional circuits are needed, as 
shown in Fig. 4. 

NOTE — If circuit No. 1 and circuit No. 3 are not needed, the 
bypass piping should be heated when there is flow in the main 
line. Since the fluid in the bypass is static, it' not separately 
controlled, it would cool to the ambient temperature. 



These are two examples of piping systems for which 
the circuit design needs close attention. Dead legs 
and manifold systems require careful arrangements 
of the trace heating devices and their associated 
controls. 



COLD END TERMINATION 



TEMPERATURE SENSOR 



HOT ENO TERMINATION 




CIRCUIT NO. 3 



Fig. 3 Heated Tank Example 



COLD END TERMINATION 



CIRCUIT NO. 1 
HOT END TERMINATION 

u 



CIRCUIT NO. 1 



h 



!L 




CIRCUIT NO. 2 



-=&*&= 



TEMPERATURE SENSOR 

Fig. 4 Bypass Example 



10 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



6.13 Dead-Leg Control Technique 

This is a technique that is sometimes used for the 
temperature control of very complex piping networks 
and manifold systems. It can also be used where the 
total number of temperature controllers are to be kept 
to a minimum at the expense of some energy savings. 
The technique consists of locating of fabricating a 
section of pipe such as a dead-leg that: 

a) has static flow condition at all times; 

b) has the same heat loss as the other piping to be 
controlled. 

Then, regardless of flow conditions, all 
sections will be heated. All sections that have 
static flow conditions at the same time will 
have the proper amount of heat required as 
the ambient temperature varies. Pipe sections 
that have flow may be heated unnecessarily. 
The merits of the dead-leg approach lie mainly 
in the trade-off in energy savings against 
savings on initial costs. Caution should be 
exercised when using this technique with 
temperature sensitive products. 

Care should be taken that first, the dead-leg section 
for control is long enough that its temperature is not 
affected by flow in the adjoining piping, and second, 
that the temperature sensor is located on the portion 
that is thermally independent of flow conditions. 

6.14 Chimney ETfect 

Long, vertical piping runs, where close temperature 
control is needed, may need two or more control 
circuits. Due to the convective circulation of the hot 
fluid, a substantial temperature difference from the 
bottom to the top of the vertical run may occur. The 
maximum control circuit length for a long, vertical 
run depends on the maintenance temperature tolerance 
and the fluid characteristics inside the pipe. 

7 CONTROL AND MONITORING 
EQUIPMENT 

7.1 General 

A control and monitoring system should be used, 
which meets the minimum requirements for the 
hazardous area classification defined in this standard 
and is appropriate to the application considerations 
for various process types according to the degree of 
criticality and process temperature accuracy as defined 
in 4.3 and 4.4. 

Such control and monitoring equipment may provide 
overcurrent protection, residual current protection, 
isolation and temperature limitations. It is essential 
that any additional requirements for particular 
applications, specified by the trace heating system 
designer for the system, also fully meet operational 
and safety requirements. 



7.2 Mechanical Controllers 

Mechanical controllers such as thermostats, utilize 
two alternative principles: a bimetallic element or 
the expansion of a fluid confined within a bulb or a 
bulb and capillary. Changes in temperature result in 
positional displacement actuating electrical contacts 
which make or break the circuit. 

Mechanical controllers are rugged; however the short 
sensing element is not grouped or panel mounted, 
and fieid calibration is cumbersome. 

Capillary and bimetallic type thermostats should be 
contained in a housing approved for use in the 
hazardous area classification appropriate to the 
installation. 

Selection of the temperature sensor used with a 
mechanical controller should take account of the 
maximum temperature rating of the sensor and its 
component parts. 

7.3 Electronic Controllers 

Electronic controllers typically use resistance 
temperature detectors (RTDs), also known as platinum 
resistance thermometers (PRTs), thermistors, 
thermocouples (T/Cs), or other temperature sensing 
devices. The controllers can therefore be located 
several hundred metres away from the electric trace 
heating system, and are often panel-mounted and 
located for ease of operator and maintenance access. 

These controllers electronically process the sensor 
signal in order to switch an electromechanical relay 
or solid state device for on-off or phase control. Field 
calibration is similar to that for standard process 
instruments. 

7.4 Application Suitability 

7.4.1 Freeze protection systems having a process 
tempeature accuracy requirement Type I may only 
require a simple ambient air sensing control system. 
For improved energy conservation, for instance a 
process temperature accuracy Type II or Type III, 
alternative or additional air sensing or pipe sensing 
controls should be considered. 

7.4.2 Most process temperature applications require 
sensing of pipe temperature and often use at least a 
mechanical thermostat. 

7.4.3 For critical applications or where temperatures 
are to be controlled within a narrow band (Type III), 
alarm functions such as high and low process 
temperature and trace heating circuit failure may be 
required. When conditions or the job specification 
require it, electronic controls should be used. For 
applications in which the temperature has to be 
controlled within a narrow band (Type III) by 
electronic controls, the controllers may be grouped 



11 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

in a common cabinet conforming to the requirements 
of the hazardous area classification. Such systems 
may also have high and low temperature, continuity, 
earth fault and system-diagnostic alarms and high- 
limit temperature switching. 

7.4.4 When using solid-state control devices, high- 
limit signals may alarm or operate the circuit 
protection device. Consideration should be given to 
grouping the controllers outside the hazardous area. 

7.5 Location of Controllers 

Where possible, temperature controllers should be 
sited to allow free and easy access to make them 
convenient for maintenance or calibration. 

7.6 Location of Sensors 

7.6.1 The number and location of sensors is 
determined by the requirements of the hazarouds area 
classification and design criteria. 

7.6.2 Where a pipeline heating circuit runs through 
areas with different ambient temperatures (such as 
inside and outside a heated building), two sensors 
and associated controls may be required to properly 
control pipeline temperatures. 

7.7 Alarm Consideration 

7.7.1 General 

The primary function of an alarm circuit is to alert 
operating personnel that the trace heating system may 
be operating outside the design limits and should 
therefore be checked for possible corrective action. 
The type and function of the various alarm systems 
depend on the requirementes of the process {see 4.3 
and 4.4). Any, or all of the alarm may be incorporated 
in data-logging equipment. The most common devices 
are listed in 7.7.2 to 7.7.4. 

7.7.2 Trace Heating Circuit Alarm 

A trace heating circuit alarm is used to detect loss of 
current, voltage, or continuity of the trace heating 
circuit, aad includes (but is not limited to) the 

following devices: 

Current sensing device, which monitors the trace 
heater current and signals an alarm if the current 
drops below a pre-set minimum whilst the temperature 
switch is closed. 

Voltage sensitive device, which monitors voltage at 
the end of the trace heater (usually a parallel type 
heating cable) or monitors voltage on a return wire 
installed within the trace heater. 

Resistance or continuity sensing devices, which 
monitor the trace heating circuit when the system is 
de-energized. Usually a low voltage signal or pulse is 
transmitted into the trace heater and monitored. 



7.7.3 Temperature Alarms 

Temperature alarms are used to perform the following 
functions: 

Low-temperature alarm — This indicates that the 
piping system and hence the process material 
temperature has fallen below a pre-set minimum and 
that subsequent cooling may be beyond acceptable 
operating design criteria. The alarm is incorporated 
with a temperature controller or fitted as a separate 
device. 

High-temperature alarm — This indicates that the 
piping system and hence process material temperature 
has exceeded a pre-set maximum temperature and 
that subsequent heating may be beyond acceptable 
operating design criteria. As with the low temperature 
alarm, the alarm is incorporated with a temperature 
controller or fitted as a separate device. 

7.7.4 Other Alarms 

Other available alarms include (but are not limited 
to) the following devices: 

Auxiliary contact alarm — The alarm is used to 
indicate when a contactor is closed and power is 
being supplied to the trace heating circuit. It provides 
information to the operator to confirm proper 
operation of the contactor, but does not ensure proper 
operation of the trace heating circuit if a secondary 
contactor is open or if the trace heater has lost 
continuity. 

Residual current protecive devices — Devices with a 
nominal 120/240 V a.c. operating voltage, and a 
single selected current trip level, are also available 
with alarm contacts. These devices monitor the 
electrical circuit earth leakage current. If the total 
exceeds the selected device's trip current, the device 
will trip, indicating a failure and interruption of the 
power to the circuit. Additionally, these monitoring 
devices are available with an alarm only function. 

Switch-actuated alarm — The alarm is usually 
initiated by an auxiliary contact on the temperature 
controller. 

Current-sensings apparatus — The apparatus consists 
of a temperature control bypass switch and an 
ammeter; or current-sensitive relays and alarms. 

Diagnostic alarm — This alarm is initiated by a 
diagnostic-circuit within the electronic controller, 
signalling failure of an internal control or data 
processing logic circuit. 

7.7.5 Integrated Control 

Trace heating system control and alarm circuitry may 
need to be integrated with a central (master) control 
and monitoring system. Careful consideration has to 
be given in the selection of equipment which is 
compatible in both the control and supervisory 



12 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



functions to ensure successful and reliable data 
transfer. 

8 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
INSTALLATION, TESTING AND 

MAINTENANCE 

8.1 Introduction 

Electric trace heating systems are designed to match 
the requirements of the process and plant. The system 
comprises a number of components integrated at site 
and it is therefore necessary to ensure that the plant 
parameters used in the design are still valid when 
the trace heating system is installed and that the 
components are installed correctly. Appropriate testing 
and maintenance are also essential to ensure 
satisfactory performance and safety. 

8.2 Scope 

This clause makes recommendations for the 
installation, repair, maintenance and testing of trace 
heating systems in hazardous locations, but not in 
those classified as zone 0. It does not cover devices 
that operate by induction heating, skin effect heating 
or direct pipeline heating, nor those intended for stress 
relieving. 

8.3 Preparatory Work 

8.3.1 General 

It is essential that the work should follow the design 
scheme and no item herein listed should be allowed 
to pass unchecked. 

8.3.2 Personnel 

Persons involved in the installation, testing and 
maintenance of electric trace heating systems should 
be suitably trained in all special techniques required, 
as well as in general electrical work. All work should 
be monitored by trained supervisors. 

8.3.3 Receiving Materials 

Upon receipt of trace heating components, a general 
inspection should be conducted including a 
confirmation of the correct type and quantities of 
materials and documentation. All trace heaters should 
be checked to verify catalogue type, power rating, 
voltage rating, quantity and special instructions. 

8.3.4 Warehousing and Handling 

Materials should be stored in protected, dry areas. 
Materials are to be released only as required on the 
jobsite to avoid unnecessary handling and inadvertent 
damage. 

8.3.5 Pre-Installation Testing 

The following tests should be performed and 
documented on a pre-installation check list and record 



similar to that in Table 2. 

a) Trace heaters should be visually checked for 
damage. Continuity and insulation checks 
should be made as a final check. Insulation 
resistance should be measured in accordance 
with 8.5.2. 

b) Individual controls should be tested to ensure 
correct calibration including, but not limited 
to, set points, operating temperature range and 
span. 

c) Vendor fabricated and assembled control panels 
should include documentation certifying that 
all wiring, layout, and functions are correct and 
have been tested. Upon receipt of the control 
panels at the work site, a general inspection 
should be made to also confirm that no damage 
has occurred in transit. 

8.3.6 Pre-Installation Checks 

Before starting installation work, the check list given 
in Table 2 should be used to determine whether the 
design matches the installation conditions. 

8.3.7 Scheduling of Installation 

The installation of the trace heating systems should 
begin only after all piping and equipment have been 
pressure tested, and all related instrumentation has 
been installed. Thermal insulation should not be 
installed until the completion and testing of the 
electrical trace heating circuit or sub-circuit. 

8.3.8 Surface Preparation 

The surface to which the trace heater is to be installed 
should be free from rust, grease, oil, etc. Any sharp 
protrusions such as weld splatter, cement splash, etc, 
should be removed. Care should be taken to ensure 
that all coatings or finishes applied to the surfaces to 
be traced are suitable for the intended duty. 

8.3.9 Component Substitution 

It is acceptable to substitute components of a trace 
heating system in accordance with the following: 

a) Components specifically listed in the supplier's 
installation or maintenance instructions should 
not be replaced with similar parts unless the 
trace heating supplier is consulted and agrees 
to the substitution. 

b) Generic components specified in the supplier's 
installation or maintenance instructions may 
be replaced with any suitably rated component. 

c) Components which are part of a wiring system 
that supplies power to the trace heater may be 
replaced with any' suitably rated component 
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. 



13 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



Table 2 Pre-Installation Checks 

{Clause 8.3.6) 



SI No. 



Item to be Checked 



Remarks 



i) Is the pipework fully erected and tested and all temporary 
support removed? Is the surface to be heated free from sharp 
eddges, weld spatter and rough surfaces? 

ii) Is the surface which the trace heater is to be applied normal 
steel or non-metallic? 

iii) Do the items to be heated correspond in size, position, etc, 
with the design 9 

iv) Has an inner foil been specified to be installed before the 
application of the trace heater 9 

v) Has an inner foil been specified to be installed after the 
application of the trace heater? 

vi) Can flow of product under normal or abnormal conditions 
reach temperatures greater than those that the trace heater 
can withstand? 

vii) Are the trace heating system designer's working drawing or 
designs, and the manufacturer's installation instruction 
available 9 

viii) Can pipe or surface expand and contract so as to cause stress 
on any part of the trace heating installation? 

ix) Can sensors of temperature controllers be affected by external 
influences? 

x) Is the trace heater to be spiralled or zig-zagged on to the 
pipework, according to the design? 

xi) Are cold leads, when fitted, suitable for contact with the 
heated surface 9 

xii) Is the pipework hung from a pipe rack? 

xiii) Does pipework have its full complement of supports? 

xiv) Are sample lines/bleed lines, etc on plant but not on drawings 9 

xv) Are other parameters used in the design of the equipment as 
specified by the design documentation? 

xvi) Are the trace heaters, controllers, junction boxes, switches, 
cable glands, etc, suitable for the hazardous area classification 
and the environmental conditions and are they protected as 
necessary against corrosion and the ingress of liquids and 
particulate matter? 



Any welding or pressure testing after the installation of a trace heater 
could damage the device. 
(see 8.3.8 and 8.4.1) 

If the surface is of polished stainless steel, very thin-walled pipe or 
non-metallic of any kind, special precautions may be necessary. 

It is sometimes difficult to be sure that the correct pipe is being 
heated. A suitable line numbering system may be of assistance. 

This may be used to provide an earth path and/or to aid heat 
distribution. 

This may be used to prevent lagging from surrounding the trace 
heaterso increasing its temperature. 

This would normally be covered in the design stage: however, further 
discussion with staff at the plant may show that incorrect or out-of- 
date information has been used. 

No change should be contemplated without reference to the trace 
heating system designer, as careful calculations are necessary to ensure 
safe operation. 

In this case precautions are necessary to avoid damage. 

An adjacent heating circuit could affect the sensor 

Check design loading per unit length of pipe (or surface area) to 
determine if spiral or zig-zag application necessary. 

If the cold lead is to be buried under the lagging, it has to be able to 
withstand the temperature. 

In this case special precautions are required to ensure the 
weatherproofing of the lagging at points of suspension. 

The addition of intermediate supports at a later stage could damage 
the heating system. 

These could obstruct or prevent the fitting of the trace heater, and 
reference to the trace heating system designer may be necessary. 



8.4 Installation of Trace Heating Systems 

8.4.1 General 

The installation of the trace heating system should 
be co-ordinated with the piping, thermal insulation, 
and instrument disciplines to ensure a scheduled 
completion date. 

Trace heaters should be installed on a clean, smooth 
portion of the equipment. Special care should be taken 
at flanges, valves and other fittings to orient trace 
heaters in such a manner as to avoid damage from 
sharp or jagged surfaces, as well as damage due to 
impact, abrasion or vibration. A check should be made 
to ensure that the cable, termination(s) and cold 
lead(s) can accommodate any movement of the piping 



and equipment resulting from expansion, contraction 
or vibration. 

The supplier of the trace heating system should 
provide specific instructions for the various types of 
system components. Instructions for components and 
trace heaters suitable and intended for unclassified 
and hazardous location use should be clearly 
identified. Instructions for trace heaters with and 
without an outer jacket should also be provided and 
clearly identified. 

8.4.2 Bonding to Earth 

Trace heater should always be connected to an 
established earth terminal. 



14 



8.4.3 Terminations 

It is essential that all types of trace heaters are 
terminated correctly. Terminations completed at the 
worksite should carefully follow the supplier's 
instructions. When mineral insulated cables are 
terminated at the job site, the cut ends should be 
sealed immediately to prevent any moisture ingress. 
Factory terminated equipment should be inspected to 
ensure that such terminations are complete, properly 
tagged and/or marked in conformity to 6 of IS 14774 
(Part 1). 

Series resistance trace heaters intended for site 
termination should be checked to ensure that the 
installed lengths correspond to the design length and 
loading. For parallel circuit trace heaters, the total 
circuit length should not exceed the supplier's 
recommendations. 

8.4.4 Cold Leads 

Checks should be made to ensure that the joints are 
waterproof, where applicable, and the bond to earth 
is valid. Cold leads, if used, should always emerge 
from the surrounding thermal insulation in such a 
way that ingress of water or other contaminants is 
not possible. Cold leads should be protected where 
they exit through thermal insulation. 

Cold leads should be fitted or modified on site only 
in strict accordance with the supplier's recommen- 
dations. Any such work carried out in hazardous areas 
will invalidate the use of the trace heater unless 
carried out in strict accordance with the specific 
instructions and upon written acceptance by the 
supplier of the trace heater. 

Where cold leads have been jointed to metal sheathed 
trace heaters by means of soldering or brazing, neither 
the trace heaters nor the cold lead should be bent 
within the proximity of the brazed joint. 

8.4.5 Junction Boxes 

Trace heating circuits should be connected into 
appropriately certified junction boxes which have 
suitable ingress protection. Junction boxes should be 
located as closely as possible to the trace heater exit 
point whilst allowing for any pipe expansion. Junction 
box lids should not be left open at any time. 

8.4.6 Cable Entries and Glands 

Trace heaters should be provided with seals and/or 
glands certified appropriately to the hazardous area. 
Glands should be fully screwed into the box and 
compression applied to provide a complete seal. 
Unused entries should be blanked off with suitable 
plugs. If unthreaded entries are used, the entry size 
should provide sufficient clearance for the threaded 
section of the gland, with the gland backnut tightened 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

against a compressible sealing washer, to seal the 
gland in the enclosure. 

8.4.7 Conductor Terminations 

Cold leads should be terminated in a safe and neat 
manner in the junction box or associated equipment. 
Terminals should be of sufficient size and rating to 
accept the conductors, which may be solid or stranded 
wires or foils. Care should be taken in stripping back 
insulation to avoid damaging the conductors. 

Compression type connectors or ferrules should be of 
the correct size and of an approved type for the 
conductor concerned. Compression tools should be 
of the ratchet type specific to the fittings used and be 
in good condition. 

Cable ends that are not finally terminated immediately 
after cutting should be sealed to prevent ingress of 
moisture and should be protected from damage 
pending completion of the termination. 

8.4.8 Terminal End Fittings 

The terminal end fitting of a trace heater should be 
securely fitted in accordance with the supplier's 
instructions and protected to avoid mechanical 
damage and the ingress of water or other contaminants 
which may adversely affect its use or suitability. 

8.4.9 Jointing, Splicing and Modifications 

Jointing, splicing and modifications to the trace heater 
should be done at site only by agreement with the 
designer and in strict accordance with the supplier's 
instructions. Any such work on trace heaters in a 
hazardous area will invalidate the hazardous area 
certificate unless the supplier has been consulted and 
the work carried out in strict accordance with 
instructions incorporated in the certificate schedule. 
This -applies particularly to any modifications to trace 
heaters where any change in unit length will alter 
the power density of the heater and affect the sheath 
temperature. Modifications should be recorded in the 
system documentation. 

8.5 Installation of Trace Heaters 

8.5.1 General 

Trace heaters should be attached to the piping and 
equipment in accordance with the supplier's 
instructions. Care should be taken to avoid high halide 
content thermal insulation materials over trace heaters 
with a stainless steel sheath or braid. 

8.5.2 Field (Worksite) Tests 

These tests should be conducted on all trace heaters 
after they have been installed. 

Prior to the application of thermal insulation, the 
insulation resistance, measured in accordance 



15 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

with 5.1.3 of IS 14774 (Part 1), under normal dry 
conditions and before connection of the trace heater 
to the associated wiring or control equipment, should 
be not less than 20 M measured at 1 000 V d.c. 

The insulation resistance of the entire branch circuit, 
after thermal insulation is complete, should not be 
less than 10 M measured at 1 000 V d.c. 

8.5.3 Thermal Contact 

A trace heater should be installed to provide as 
intimate a contact as is reasonably possible to the 
surface to be heated. Where such contact is not 
possible, such as on valves, a suitable heat sink of 
temperature rated metal foil or heat conducting 
materials may be used. A constant wattage tracer 
should not be overlapped. 

8.5.4 Laying 

8.5.4.1 General 

The trace heater should not be fold, twisted, or allowed 
to overlap, cross or touch itself unless this is 
specifically permitted in the supplier's instructions. 
Attention should be given to the supplier's minimum 
bending radii. 

8.5.4.2 Straight tracing runs 

Trace heaters installed on straight, horizontal runs of 
piping should be located on the lower 180° segment 
of the pipe or equipment to maximize heat transfer 
and minimize ingress of water. Special consideration 
should be given when applying trace heaters in long 
vertical runs. Multiple straight trace heaters should 
be equi-spaced around the circumference of the pipe. 

8.5.4.3 Spiral tracing runs 

Spiral pitch marking should be made on the pipe and 
equipment before applying the cable in a uniform 
spiral, starting at the power supply point and 
maintaining slight tension in the trace heater as it is 
applied. If, at the end of the section to be heated, 
excess or insufficient trace heater exists, the spiral 
pitch should be shortened or lengthened to retain a 
uniform spiral in general accordance with the design. 
In no circumstances should the spacing be less than 
the minimum declared by the supplier. 

NOTE — While spiral tracing may be more convenient on short 
runsw piping and equipment, multiple straight tracing runs may 
be preferred for ease of installation and maintenance. 

8.5.5 Fixing and Banding 

Fixing material should be suitable for the maximum 
exposure temperature and the environmental 
conditions. For straight tracing runs, they should be 
located at intervals not exceeding 300 mm, and for 
spiral tracing runs, not exceeding 2 000 mm. 
Additional fixings should be applied at bends, flanges 
and other obstructions. 



NOTE — Metal bands should only be sued to fix solid metal 
sheath trace heaters to pipe and equipment, and tightened to 
maintain contact with the surface to be heated. Over-tightening 
may damage the trace heater. 

8.5.6 Additional Heat Loss Compensations 

Additional lengths of trace heater should be allowed 
in the design to compensate for the additional heat 
losses at valves, flanges, strainers, pumps, etc. These 
lengths should be applied in accordance with the 
supplier's instructions. 

8.5.7 Protection from Leaks 

Where trace heaters cross possible sources of leaks, 
for example, flanges, they should be positioned to 
minimize contact with the leaking medium. 

8.5.8 Damage Protection 

Precautions should be taken to protect trace heaters 
and avoid the possibility of mechanical damage and 
hazard to personnel prior to and after they have been 
installed and prior to the application of thermal 
: nsulation. The installer should liaise with the 
insulation contractor to ensure that the thermal 
insulation is applied as soon as possible after the 
installation and testing of trace heaters. 

8.6 Installation of Control and Monitoring 
Equipment 

8.6.1 General 

The installer is usually responsible for fixing the 
control and monitoring and distribution panels. These 
will as a minimum provide over-current and earth 
leakage protection and means of isolation. Some form 
of temperature control or limitation is usually provided 
to ensure safe temperatures or for energy efficiency 
purposes. 

8.6.2 Sensor Considerations 

The sensor should be installed and positioned in 
accordance with the supplier's instructions. The sensor 
should not be situated in areas of external radiant 
heat, solar gain, process heat discharge, or close to a 
heat building. Care should be exercised to ensure the 
sensor senses appropriate temperature conditions 
within a trace heated zone and away from the end of 
a pipe or a pipe support. Ambient temperature sensing 
controllers should be sited in the most exposed 
position for the installation. 

8.6.3 Sensor Installation 

The sensor should be strapped in good thermal contact 
with the pipe or equipment and protected so that 
thermal insulation cannot be trapped between the 
sensor and the heated surface. Care should be taken 
not to damage the capillary tube, thermocouple or 



16 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



RTD leads, or to distort the sensor and thereby cause 
calibration error. 

8.6.4 Protection Against Damage 

Excess capillary tube may be run under the thermal 
insulation unless the overall length exceeds 1 m, in 
which case the volume of the capillary may be such 
as to affect the calibration adversely. 

8.6.5 Exit of Sensor from Thermal Insulation 

Care should be taken to ensure that the capillary 
tube, thermocouple or RTD leads emerge from the 
thermal insulation in a manner that will not allow 
the ingress of moisture. 

8.6.6 Controller Housing 

Water and corrosive vapour intrusion are factors 
leading to the failure of temperature controllers. The 
cover or lid of a controller housing should always be 
closed before, during and after installation except 
when required for access. 

The controller and sensors shall be certified in 
accordance with an appropriate type of protection. 

The controller should be set to the required 
temperature and re-calibrated if necessary. A function 
check should be made by adjusting the temperature 
setting until the controller is seen to energize the 
trace heater. 

8.6.7 Process Temperature Controllers 

If additional controllers are indicated for process 
reasons, the sensors should be surface mounted or 
located in thermowells sited at suitable positions, for 
example above sludge levels in vessels. 

8.6.8 Other Equipment 

All other equipment should be installed and checked 
in accordance with the instructions provided. 

8.7 Installation of Thermal Insulation System 
{see also 5) 

8.7.1 General 

Installation of thermal insulation should conform to 
national standards and local regulations. Each section 
of the trace heating system should be thermally 
insulated immediately after it has been installed to 
provide mechanical and weather protection. Prior to 
the installation of any thermal insulation, the installed 
trace heating shall have been tested in accordance 
with 5 of IS 14774 (Part 1). 

8.7.2 Preparatory Work 

Before starting the installation, it is recommended 
that site engineering should establish a liaison between 
the trace heating installer and the thermal insulation 
contractor. The following checks and procedures 



should be confirmed. 

a) Verify that the type, inside diameter, and 
thickness agree with the values used in 
selection of the trace heater(s). 

b) Temporary weather protection should be 
provided during storage, handling and 
installation to avoid the risk of moisture being 
trapped in the thermal insulation beneath its 
final weather protective coating or jacket. 

8.7.3 Installation of the Thermal Insulation 
Materials 

Thermal insulation should be applied to all sections 
of the pipe and equipment, including flanges, valves, 
pipe supports, bends, T-junctions, etc. If expansion 
joints or bellows are installed in the system, provision 
should be made for their thermal insulation in such a 
manner that it does not impair the thermal efficiency 
of the trace heating system. 

Oversized thermal insulation may be required in order 
to ensure that the trace heater and equipment are 
adequately covered. Other considerations include: 

a) All penetrations should be sealed to prevent 
the ingress of moisture. Wherever possible, 
penetrations should be in the lower 180° 
segment of the thermal insulation. 

b) The thermal insulation should be cut and fitted 
to avoid air gaps. Stagger segment joints on 
the horizontal plane to minimize convective 
heat loss. 

c) The use of metal foil should be considered for 
covering the trace heater on valves and other 
irregularly shaped equipment to prevent the 
thermal insulation from surrounding the trace 
heater. 

8.7.4 Cladding 

Where metal cladding is specified, particular care 
should be taken to ensure that bare edges of metalwork 
cannot come in to direct contact with the trace heater 
or its components. 

Areas of greatest risk are as follows: 

a) Flanges — Metalwork should be cut back and 
the exposed face of the thermal insulation 
finished with a suitable non-absorbent 
compound. 

b) Valves — A preformed insulating jacket should 
be overlength and carried on to adjacent 
pipework cladding. 

c) Bends, pipe "L "fitting or tees — Care should 
be taken not to force the adjacent straight pipe 
section of cladding into the bend and thereby 
risk damage to the trace heater. 



17 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 

Bends with rolled edge interlocking sections are 
preferred. A non-setting sealer should be used between 
the overlapped sections of metallic weather barriers 
of jackets. When rivets or self-tapping screws are 
used, care should be taken to ensure that any drill or 
screw used is not long enough to penetrate the 
thickness of the thermal insulation and damage the 
trace heating system installed beneath it. 

Advisory labels should be affixed to the cladding to 
advise that an electric trace heating system is installed 
beneath the thermal insulation. 

8.8 Commissioning 

8.8.1 Pre-Commissioning Test 

Before any part of an electric trace heating system is 
energized by connection to the electrical power supply, 
the test procedure given in 8.5.2 guide should be 
performed and the results recorded as part of the 
system documentation. The pre-commissioning check 
list given in Table 3 should be completed and retained. 

8.8.2 Trace Heating Commissioning 

The trace heating system(s) should be commissioned 
after the thermal insulation has been installed, using 
the heater commissioning record given in Table 4, 
which should be completed and retained. 

8.9 Maintenance 

8.9.1 General 

It is recommended that the maintenance schedule 
given in Table 5 should be undertaken at intervals 
not exceeding one year. More frequent and/or more 
detailed inspection may be necessary in corrosive or 
other hostile environments or where there is a high 
risk of mechanical damage. The need for more 
frequent inspection should be determined by 
operational experience and by consultation with the 
user/occupier of the plant. 

All maintenance activities should be recorded in a 
maintenance log (such as that shown in Table 5), 
and retained in the system documentation. 

8.9.2 Fault Location 

Specialized methods of fault location are necessary 
to find faults in electric trace heating systems covered 
by thermal insulation and metallic cladding and 
advice should be sought from the electric trace heating 
system designer. 

A brief outline of the steps that may be necessary is 
given below. 

a) The exact layout of the electric trace heating 
system should be determined from the system 
documentation. If this proves inadequate, an 
'induction' instrument operating at approxi- 



mately 1 000 Hz should be used to inject a 
signal into the electric trace heating device and 
the route of the device should be followed by 
the audible signal obtained from the 
instrument. 

b) The type of fault should be determined, for 
instance, open circuit or leakage to earth. 

c) If there is an open circuit or low resistance to 
earth of less than approximately 500 ..., a pulse 
echo or reflection instrument can be used with 
a considerable degree of success. Other faults 
should be traced using a bridge-type instrument 
employing a 'Murray loop test' or variation 
thereof. 

8.9.3 Fault Rectification 

Having located the fault, the defective component 
should be replaced or repaired in accordance with 
the requirements of this standard. Those parts of the 
installation that have been disturbed should be 
checked in accordance with Table 4 and recorded in 
accordance with Table 5. 

8.10 Repairs 

8.10.1 General 

NOTE — When a fault occurs in an electrical trace heating 
system it is necessary first to determine the cause. Most faults are 
casued by mechanical damage, corrosion, overheating or ingress 
of moisture. 

Only when the cause has been eliminated should the 
defects be rectified by site repair or replacement. Site 
repair should be carried out only if the following 
conditions are satisfied: 

a) The repaired component will perform its 
designated function without undue change in 
electrical characteristic. 

b) Design and construction characteristics of the 
component are maintained, for example 
mechanical strength and water resistance. 

c) A method of repair is recommended by the trace 
heating system designer and any special 
materials and tools are specified by him/her. 

d) No local hazard will be created in carrying out 
the repair. 

e) It does not invalidate the certificate for certified 
apparatus. Any repairs to certified apparatus 
used in hazardous areas should be strictly in 
accordance with any specific instructions 
incorporated in the certificate schedule; the 
trace heating system designer should be 
consulted. 

Where any of these conditions cannot be met, a 
replacement component should be fitted. 



18 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



8.10.2 Practicability of Repair to Electric Trace 
Heaters 

8.10.2.1 Mechanical damage 

NOTE — If the trace heater has not previously been energized 
and mechanical damage has resulted in breakdown in electrical 
insulation, severed conductors or ingress of moisture, repair should 
normally be possible. 

If the fault is found only after electrical connection 
and the damage is confined to a small area, visual 
inspection of the trace heater for 1 m on either side 
of the fault should be undertaken to show whether 
the electrical insulation is affected other than at the 
point of mechanical damage. 

8.10.2.2 Damage due to corrosion 

NOTE — Where breakdown results from corrosive action and 
the damage is limited to a small area, a repair should normally 
be possible. 

If the electrical trace heater has been damaged at 
more than one point or the damaged area is extensive, 
it should be replaced. 

If the cause of corrosion cannot be removed, the trace 
heater should either be replaced by one capable of 
withstanding the corrosive effects, or be re-routed. 

8.10.2.3 Damage due to overheating 

Repairs should be carried out only when damage is 
limited to a small area. 

If a system design fault is suspected, the trace heating 
system designer should be consulted. 

8. 1 0.3 Repair Techniques for Electrical Trace 
Heaters 

8.10.3.1 General 

NOTE — Techniques employed in the repair of electrical trace 
heaters vary with the type of heater and its manufacturer. It is 
therefore outside the scope of this standard to detail actual 
methods. 

Generally the repair of an electrical trace heater will 
take the form of an in-line splice or a series connection 
via a junction box. 



General procedures that should be adopted are given 
in this sub-clause, however, only those methods 
recommended by the supplier should be adopted and 
only materials or tools recommended by the supplier 
should be used. 

8.10.3.2 In-line Splice 

The removal of a damaged section of heating 
conductor should not alter the resistance of the trace 
heater to a value differing by more than 5 percent 
from its original design value. If an in-line splice is 
to operate at elevated temperatures, care should be 
taken to ensure that the repaired joint is not subjected 
to stresses in operation. This may be achieved, for 
example, by providing an expansion loop on either 
side of the joint. The section 150 mm on either side 
of the joint should not be bent when re-applied to the 
workpiece, and good contact should be ensured. 

8.10.3.3 Series connection via junction box 

The repair should not alter the resistance of the trace 
heater to a value differing by more than 5 percent 
from its original design value. Where cold leads are 
applied to the ends of the severed heating conductors, 
the trace heater and repair joints should be firmly 
reaffixed to the workpiece to ensure good contact. 
Fitting of cold leads and terminations into the junction 
box should be in accordance with the supplier's 
instructions. 

8.10.4 Earthing 

Where trace heaters are earthed by means of a metal 
braid, metal sheath or foil screen, the integrity and 
continuity of the earth should not be impaired by the 
repair. 

8.10.5 Testing 

The repaired trace heater(s) shall be subjected to the 
tests described in 8.5.2 before re-installation. 



19 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



Table 3 Pre-Commissioning Checks and Heater Installation Record 

{Clause 8.8.1) 





Location 


System 


Project Manager 


Reference drawing(s) 


Line number 


Heater number 


Area classification 


T-Classiflcation 


Panel number 


Location 


Circuit number 


Circuit amp/voltage 


Heater manufacturer 


Heater model 


Heater wattage unit length/voltage rating 


Megohm meter manufacture/model 


Voltage setting 


Accuracy/full scale 


Megohm meter date of last calibration 


Multimeter manufacture/mode! 


Ohm setting 


Accuracy/full scale 


HEATER TESTING 


Test value/remarks 


Date Initials 


NOTE — Minimum acceptable insulation resistance shall be 20 M. Minimum acceptable test voltage is 1 000 V d.c. However 1 000 V 
d.c. recommended for MI 2 500 V d.c. for polymeric cables. 


1 ) Receipt of material on reel 


Continuity test on reel 






Insulation resistance lest on reel 






2) Piping completed (approval to start heater installation) 






3) After installation 


4) Heater installed (approval to start thermal insulation installation) 


Heater correctly installed on pipe, vessel or equipment 






Heater correctly installed at valves, pipe supports, other heat sinks 






Components correctly installed and terminated (power, tee, end seal) 






Installation agrees with manufacturers instructions and circuit design 






5) Thermal insulation installation complete 


Continuity test 






Insulation resistance test 






SYSTEM INSPECTED 






6) Marking, tagging and identification complete [see 6 of IS 14774 (Part 1)] 






7) Heater effectively earthed 






8) Temperature controls properly installed and set points verified 






9) Junction boxes all certified and closed 






10) Thermal insulation weather tight (all penetrations sealed) 






1 1 ) End seals, covered splices marked on insulation outer cladding 






12) Drawings, documentation marked as-built 






Performed by: 


Company 


Date 


Witnessed by: 


Company 


Date- 


Accepted by: 


Company 


Date 


Approved by: 


Company 


Date 





20 



IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



Table 4 Heater Commissioning Record 

(Clauses 8.8.2 and 8.9.3) 





Location 


System 


Project Manager 


Reference drawings) 


Line number 


Heater number 


Area classification 


T-Classilication 


Panel number 


Location 


Circuit number 


Circuit amp/voltage 


Heater manufacturer 


Heater model 


Heater wattage unit length/ voltage rating 


HEATER INFORMATION: 


Heater total design length 


Heater total installed length 


Thermal insulation type 


Thermal insulation thickness 


Normal pipe temperature 


Maintain pipe temperature 


HEATER TESTING: (data from heater installation record) 


Electrical resistance (continuity) test in ohms 


Electrical insulation resistance test in megohms 


Test ambient temperature 


PERFORMANCE 
DATA : 


Volts a.c 


Current in amperes 




Panel 


Field 


1 Phase 


3 Phase 








Line 


A Phase 


B Phase 


C Phase 


Neutral 


Startup 
















After 10 mm 
















After 4 h 
















Ambient temperature at time of test 


Pipe temperature at beginning of test 


After 4 h 


Calculated watts per unit length (volt * amp/length) 


After 4 h 


TEMPERATURE CONTROL: Type 


Heater controller 


Ambient sensing 


Pipe sensing 


Temperature setpoint 


Heater limit controller 


Type 


Location 


Temperature setpoint 


Heating controls calibrated 


Heating controls operation verified 


ALARMS/MONITORING: Type 


Temperature 


High setting 


Low setting 


Operation verified 


Heater current 


High setting 


Low setting 


Operation verified 


Residual current 


Setting 


Operation verified 


Loss of voltage 


Operation verified 


Other 


Operation verified 


RCD PROTECTION: Type 


Setting 


Measured current 


Tested in operation 


Performed by: 


Company 


Date 


Wintnessed by: 


Company 


Date 


Accepted by: 


Company 


Date 


Approved by: 


Company 


Date 





IS 14774 (Part 2) : 2000 



Table 5 Maintenance Schedule and Log Record 

(Clauses 8.9.1 and 8.9.3) 



Location 


System 


Reference drawing(s) 


CIRCUIT INFORMATION 


Heater Cat No. 


Circuit length 


Breaker panel No. 


Power connection 


Design voltage 


Breaker pole(s) No. 


Tee connection 


Residual current protection (type) 


Splice connection 


Residual current trip setting 


Heater controller 




VISUAL 


Panel No. 


Circuit No. 
















Date 
















Initial 














Thermal insulation 


Damaged insulation/lagging 














Water seal good 














Insulation/lagging missing 














Presence of moisture 














Heating system components 














Enclosures, boxes sealed 














Presence of moisture 














Signs of corrosion 














Heater lead discolouration 














Heating and/or high limit controller 














Operating property 




ELECTRICAL 














Insulation resistance testing (bypass controller if applicable) refer to 5.1.3 of IS 14774 (Part 1 ) and 7 of this standard. 


Test voltage 
















Megger value, M 
















Heater supply voltage 
















Value at power source 
















Value at field connection 
















Heater circuit current reading 
















Amps reading at 2 to 5 min 
















Amps reading after 15 min 
















Ground-fault current 
















Comments and actions 


Performed by: 


Company 


Date 


Approved by: 


Company 


Date 



22 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. ETD 22(5075), 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M,V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17, 323 38 41 



p37 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



C 



f60 38 43 
160 20 25 
r235 02 16, 235 04 42 
1235 15 19, 235 23 15 

f832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91, 832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



