**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12826-3 (1990) : Code of practice for ordering, testing 
and acceptance of industrial furnaces. Part 3: Testing and 
aceptancce of industrial furnaces [MTD 26: Industrical Fuel 
Fired Furnaces] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS 12826 ( Parts) : 1990 

(Reaffirmed 1996) 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ORDERING, 

TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF 

INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 

PART 3 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 



UDC 66*041 : 62016 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BIIAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SKAIf ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1990 Pfice Group 3 



Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee, MTD 26 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 22 February 
1990, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Fuel-Fired Furnaces Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 

Industrial furnaces for various applications including heat treatment are required to be designed 
and supplied for individual applications. After the purchaser has spelt out his requirements and 
the supplier has agreed to supply the furnaces of requisite characteristics, the need for acceptance 
testing of furnace arises. 

This part ( Part 3 ) of the code outlines the suppliers' obligations and the purchasers' obligations 
in making arrangements for testing. 

This code is being prepared in following three parts to facilitate the ordering, supply and 
acceptance testing of the industrial furnaces: 

Part 1 Purchaser's data sheet for ordering of industrial furnaces 
Part 2 Supplier's data sheet for the supply of industrial furnaces 
Part 3 Testing and acceptance cf irdustrial furnaces 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2011 

TO 

IS 12826 (PART 3) : 1989 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

ORDERING, TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 

PART 3 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 

(Page 2, clause 7.1.2, line 1) — Substitute 'Batch type furnaces' /6>r 'discontinuous'. 
[Page 3, clause 9.3.1(c)] — Substitute 'Moisture percentage' /or 'Humidity'. 
[Page 3, clause 9.3.1(d)] — Add the following after 9.3.1(d): 
e) Viscosity. 



(MTD 26) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR ORDERING, 

TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF 

INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 

PART 3 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL FURNACES 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers the pro- 
visions of supplier's obligations, purchaser's 
obligations and the agreements for performance 
testing of industrial furnaces and details of 
various tests to be carried out. 



2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standards listed below 
necessary adjuncts to this standard: 



are 



IS No. Title 

8849 : 1978 Glossary of terms relating to 
fuel-fired industrial furnaces 

9180 : 1979 Recommendations for perfor- 
mance rating of fuel-fired 
furnaces 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the 
definitions given in IS 8849 : 1978 shall apply. 

4 GENERAL 

4.1 The supplier and the purchaser shall agree 
on delivery schedules of plant and equipment 
and the schedules for provision of various 
facilities by the purchaser essential for correction 
and commissioning of the furnaces/system. 

5 SUPPLIER'S OBLIGATIONS 

5.1 The supplier shall have the responsibilities 
to provide the following: 

a) Lay down the programme of delivery of 
drawings, designs, etc, required for carry- 
ing out the work that has to be done by 
the purchaser; making ready the machinery 
and materials, the deliveries and the 
stages of progress of the work. 

b) Supply drawings/details/instruction for 
the work of laying the foundation, con- 
struction of any other facility required to 
be provided by the purchaser and for 
providing connections for utility services, 
etc, as may be agreed upon in the contract 
for the purpose of getting ready for the 
furnace or the plant. 

c) Give instructions for the working and 
maintenance of the plant. 



d) Supply plants and materials in accordance 
with the requirements laid down in the 
order within the specified tolerance, 
if any. 

e) Achieve the operation, thermal and/or 
technological and productives, both for 
quality and quantity, according to the 
contract, assuming in each case, the 
responsibility of the functioning itself 
(achieving the temperature, the atmos- 
phere and the movements of the materials 
in the established succession and time, 
yields and consumptions). 



f) 



g) 



Assume also technological responsibility 
on product quality based on specified 
conditions and to the extent, these are 
agreed upon in the contract. 



If required, 
the site. 



deliver the materials at 



h) If required, carry out or direct the 
installation (assembly), 

j) If required, provide assistance and send 
own staff for starting the plant. 

k) Unless otherwise agreed upon, remove 
from the site at own responsibility and 
expense all materials, machinery and 
equipment and leave it clean after com- 
pletion of work, in any case within 
30 days from the request received from 
the purchaser. 

S.2 The details of obligations of the supplier 
are given in Annex A. 

6 PURCHASER'S OBLIGATIONS 

6.1 The purchaser shall have the responsibilities 
to meet the schedules of completion of various 
works at the factory before the deliveries and 
during the various points of supplies as agreed 
to before the supplies are made. Such work 
should include finalization of general layout of 
the plant/accessories, routing of cables and 
utility pipings, alterations/shifting of existing 
plants/accessories, if required, for the above 
purpose. 

6.2 Before the deliveries from the supplier and 
during erection, the purchaser shall provide all 
the faciUtics to the supphcr or his agent for 
erection, commissioning of the furnace or the 



1 



IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990 



system as may be agreed upon the contract. 
Following details shall be observed in particular: 

a) Make available on schedule the land and 
the location for the plant in a condition 
suitable for carrying out the work; 

b) Complete the foundation work on 
schedule; 

c) Complete on schedule all the preparations 
for starting the work and may also, 
include approval of drawings/details, 
carrying out of stage inspection, if requir- 
ed, within the agreed time schedule. 

d) For starting adjusting the testing of the 
plant, make available all that is 
required by the supplier as per agreement 
on schedule; 

e) Take care of guarding and maintaining 
the site as provided in the contract. 

7 4GREEMENTS FOR TESTING 

7.1 Partial Testing 

The supply is subjected to test for checking the 
proper functioning of the plant and in regard to 
the guarantees as laid down in the contract. 

7.1.1 The test shall be carried out after the 
necessary period of setting up the furnace which 
shall be specified for each contract. For 
continuous furnaces, the test shall be carried 
out in stable working regime of production for 
a period that shall be laid down in the order 
according to the characteristics of the plant. 

7.1.2 For discontinuous furnaces, the test sl;all 
include at least one work cycle. 

7.1.3 Specific requirements and guarantee can 
be agreed to for the no load working and work- 
ing under reduced load and for the transient 
states of working. 

8 PATENTS 

8.1 The supplier shall assume the full responsi- 
bility for the procedures, equipment, devices 
and material covered by patents. 

9 TESTING 

9.1 Preliminary Operations 

These include the verifications of construction 
and supply and the functional tests carried out 
before starting the plant. 

9.1.1 These may include: 

a) Verification of consistency and conformity 
to the contract as also the assessment of 
dimensional tolerances ( see Annex B ); 

b) Tests of strength: 

I) Static load tests and verification of the 
settlement of foundations. 



2) Pressure tests, 

c) Tests for leak ( pressure tightness ) ( both 
outward and inward ); 

1) Gas tightness ( hermeticity ). 

2) Distribution and circuits of operating 
fluids ( atmosphere, cooling, etc ). 

3) Hydraulic circuits, oil dynamic circuits 
and pneumatic circuits. 

d) Functional tests of machines and 
mechanisms: 

1) For blowers: pressure, range, power, 
balance and stability, pumping, noise, 
etc. 

2) For mechanisms: operation of the 
doors, loading and unloadings, feed, 
movement and positioning of the 
materials, movement of the trolhes, 
various mechanisms, testing the regu- 
larity of vibrations, velocity, absorbed 
power, frictions, interference. 

3) For controls and regulations: checking 
of control/regulation circuits/lines, 
calibration of instruments/apparatus 
and regulation response, proper inter- 
vention of alarms and safety devices, 
automatic and sequential operation of 
accessories, as may be required. 

4) For protection and safety of the plant 
and the personnel: devices against excess 
loading, lightning strikes, earthing, 
explosion doors ( hatches ) protection 
against accidents due to falling of things 
and persons and crushing, moving 
parts, radiation and flame. 

9.2 Inspection Tests 

Inspection test shall be started after the furnace 
is installed and commissioned and upon the 
expiry of specified stabilization period* 

Time schedule for conducting the tests should 
be specified in the contract. 

Recommendations for performance rating of 
fuel-fired furnaces ( IS 9l80 should also supple- 
ment the recommendations made under this 
clause ). 

9.2,1 As a rule, the following shall be verified: 

a) The stability of the structure under heat, 
the nature, amount and functional tole- 
rance of deformations; 

b) The regularity of working under heat of 
the furnace and the control and regulating 

systems; 

c) The production capacity; 

d) The temperature and the thermal cycle; 
and 

e) The consumption figures. 



IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990 



9.2.2 It shall furthermore be verified if the 
following parameters are specified in the 
contract: 

a) The atmosphere; 

b) The times of starting, stabilization and 
stopping; and 

e) The technological results, heat balances, 
etc. 

9.2.3 Tests on Continuous Furnaces 

Inspection shall be carried out under normal 
stabilized operating conditions, treating the 
materials specified in the contract. Normally, a 
reference charge material/dimension should be 
specified in the contract for conducting the 
tests. Duration of the test shall be agreed 
upon in the contract. The following parameters 
shall be determined; 

a) The production capacity; 

b) The temperature at all the characteristic 
points of the furnaces and all the other 
thermal cycle data laid down in the 
contract and in any case, necessary for 
ascertaining that the furnace complies with 
the conditions agreed upon; 

c) The average hourly and maximum con- 
sumption and the cqpsumptions per unit 
of the product; 

d) If provided, the data indicated under 
(a), (b) and (c) of 9.2.2 and that may be 
necessary for technological verification 
of the furnace, 

9.2.4 Tests on Discontinuous Furnaces 

The inspection shall as a rule be carried out in 
at least one normal working cycle functioning 
in the conditions and treating the materials as 
provided in the contract. The following para- 
meters shall be determined; 

a) The production capacity; 

b) The temperature of the characteristic 
point of the furnace and where provided, 
those of the material and the other tempe- 
ratures which are in any case necessary 
for verification of the thermic cycle as 
function of time; 

c) The consumptions for normal cycle and 
those for unit of the material produced; 

d) If provided, the data indicated at (a), (b) 
and (c) of 9.2.2 and that may be necessary 
for the technological verification of the 
furnace. 

9*3 Tests for Energy Sources 

It is necessary to check and verify the character- 
istics of the energy sources used. Following 
parameters shall be checked. 



9.3.1 For fuel fires furnaces, the following para- 
meters shall be checked: 

a) Type of fuel and density, 

b) Composition, 

c) Humidity, and 

d) Lower and upper heating values. 

9.3.2 In addition to parameters specified in 9.3.1 
for gas and liquid fuels, the following para- 
meters shall also be checked: 

a) Temperature, 

b) Relative pressure before the burner, and 

c) Maximum and minimum pressure at which 
the guarantee can be maintained. 

9.4 Test of Material to be Tested in the Furnace 
Inspection 

It is necessary to check and verify exactly the 
following geometrical, mechanical and thermal 
properties of the material which is charged in 
the furnace during tests: 

a) Form and quality of the material; 

b) Dimensions ( length, width, thickness 
and section ), unit mass and, for the bulk 
materia], bulk density ( apparant density ); 

c) Temperature of the material when 
loading; and 

d) Humidity. 

9.5 Test of Material Treated in the Inspection 

It is necessary to exactly test and verify the 
following geometrical, mechanical and thermal 
characteristic of the material treated in the 
inspection: 

a) Temperature of the output ( superficial 
and, if necessary, below the shell in the 

core ); 

b) Technological properties of the product; 

c) Quality and uniformity of the product 
( classification in selection, rejection, 
etc ); and 

d) Various properties ( oxidation, etc ). 

9.6 Test Procedure 

The inspection test shall be carried out under 
the direction and responsibility of the supplier 
in the presence of the puichaser. If provided 
in the contract, the supplier shall also cairv 
out the inspection under the direction of the 
inspection agency. 

9.7 Inspection Report 

A report shall be prepared for all the tests 
carried out. The results of the inspection and 
comparison with the contract specifications 
shall be given in the repo t. The report shall 
be countersigned by both the p;M tics/representa- 
tive of inspection agency. 



IS 12826 ( Part 3 ) : 1990 



10 ACCEPTANCE 

10.1 Acceptance Tests 

The acceptance tests shall be carried out on the 
complete and working furnace and can be 
identified fully or partly with the inspection 
tests. 

10. LI If acceptance tests^ separate from 
inspections tests are provided these shall be 
specified in the contract which should indicate 
the time schedule for carrying out the accept- 
ance tests after the inspection tests. 

10.1.2 The acceptari-2 tests shall b^ carried 



out with the same methods as the inspection 
tests. 

10.2 Aim of Acceptance Tests 

The characteristics of the furnace specified in 
the contract shall b^ verified. Generally these 
are the same as indicated in 9.2. 

10.3 Documents 

The acceptance of furnace shall be indicated in 
a written declarations issued by the purchaser 
on the applicable of the supplier certifyiag that 
the tests were satisfactory. 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.2 ) 

OBLIGATIONS OF THE SUPPLIER 



A-1 When the construction is done by the 
purchaser, the supplier is responsible for the 
project and assume also the responsibility for 
the execution, assembly, quality and endurance 
of the materials supplied and those prescribed 
and acquired as per these specifications provided 
the suppliers instructions for doing the assembly 
work are observed and the supplier supervises 
as per contract the construction and starting of 
the furnace employing his expertise for this 
purpose. During the course of execution of the 
work the supplier has the right to suggest some 
alternations and variations to the project which 
constitute improvements. 

A-2 If the construction is the responsibility of 
the supplier any changes to the programme 
should be agreed to in advance between the 
parties. 

A-2,1 The contract includes the services of the 
experts connected with the assembly, the furnace 
and insulation for utilizing the materials consti- 
tuting the walls and the insulation for protection, 
unless these are specifically excluded from the 
contract. 

A-2.2 As a rule, the service of technicians is 
also included for the supervision and direction 
of the assembly work, for making ready the 



installation or plant and for the assistance to the 
starting trials and inspection tests. 

A-2,3 It may also be agreed to take the services 
of the personnel of the supplier for instructing 
the personnel of the purchaser for a determined 
period. 

A-3 Whenever the supplier provides the supply 
and execution of the refractory linings clearly 
specified in the order, the purchaser can ask 
him to contact the company which has been 
entrusted with the construction of the support- 
ing structures. 

A-3.1 The purchaser can ask the supplier to 
send the drawings of the lining that are required 
for the maintenance and the first acceptance 
procedure. 

A-4 In the case of complete supply the supplier 
shall be fully and exclusively responsible for all 
that is required for the construction, the lining 
and the finishing of the furnace ready for the 
purpose and not specifically stipulated in the 
contract as falling within the responsibility of 
the purchaser. 

A-5 The supplier shall constantly keep thQ 
purchaser informed of the name of the site 
manager responsible for the work. 



IS 12826 ( Part 3 ): 1990 



ANNEX B 
r Clause 9AA (a)] 



DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES 



B-1 DIMENSION OF THE FOUNDATIONS 
AND METALLIC STRUCTURES 
REINFORCED CONCRETE, ETC 

B-1.1 Tolerences, to be indicated on drawings, 
can be provided particularly in cases where the 
structures are supplied by a third party and 
specially for the support plane levels for which, 
in general- negative tolerances are required 
( planes lower than the nominal level ). 

B-2 DIMENSIONS OF THE LABORATORIES 
AND PASSAGES OF THE MATERIALS 
AND FLUIDS 

B-2.1 If it is very essential not to fall short of 
the project ( design ) dimensions, only positive 
tolerances shall be allowed within the limits to 
be agreed upon ( furnace with chamber, pipe 
section ). 

B-2. 2 If the mating of the outline of the hearth 
with that of the charge is decisive, either plus, 
or plus-minus tolerances can be provided as per 



agreement ( transverse dimensions and straight- 
ness of the axis of tunnel type furnaces ). 

B-3 THICKNESS, OF REFRACTORY AND 
COMMON WALLS AND INSULATIONS 

B.3.1 Walls 

Unless otherwise agreed upon, the wall shall 

have the nominal structure as per the design 
( number of heads, nominal dimensions of the 
bricks ) and the tolerances resulting from the 
sum of the tolerances on the joints and bricks are 
applicable. 

B-3.2 Insuiaiion 

Unless otherwise agreed upon only positive 
tolerances on the design dimensions shall be 
allowed. 

B-4 MECHANICAL TESTS 

B-4.1 Unless otherwise agreed upon the 
tolerances given in the design shall be applicable. 



Standard Mark 



The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



