•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 14804 (2000) : Siting, Design and Selection of Materials 
for Residential Buildings in Hilly Areas - Guidelines [CED 
56: Hill Area Development Engineering] 



\*^!iIUZ£^±2^T<!>^lXY&& 



2$as\ v i i>5ft>5^>«sv: 



^^\\X^L 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14804: 2000 



Indian Standard 

SITING, DESIGN AND SELECTION OF MATERIALS FOR 
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS IN HILLY AREAS — 

GUIDELINES 



ICS 9 1 .0^0; 9 1 .040.30; 9 1 . 1 00 



©BIS 2000 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFARMARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 2000 Price Group 6 



Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hill Area Development 
Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Hilly areas in our country are prone to natural calamities like high speed winds, heavy rainfalls, cloud bursts, flash 
floods, frequent landslides, etc, and most regions fall under seismic zones IV and V. These natural disasters cause 
annual losses to life and property. The availability of data on types of housing and use of buildings materials in 
hilly region is limited. The building materials employed in construction of residential building are limited in their 
availibity. Therefore, conservation of materials assumes importance in design as well as construction activities. 
The use of new materials and technologies is imperative in addition to the need to lay down standards on strengthening 
measures for the existing structures, as well as design parameters for new structures. 

This standard only provides guidelines in respect of disaster resistant constructions. For details corresponding 
codes of practices may be referred wherever applicable. 

Emphasis should be laid while designing the layout of buildings, so as to meet the requirements for proper disposal 
of rain and sewage water with proper spouts and gutters in the roof so that the undue loading is not generated in 
the foundation or in the retaining wall due to accumulation of water. 

The composition of technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex C. 

There is no ISO standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on practices prevalent in the field 
in India. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded of in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (rev ised )\ The number of significant places to be retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 



IS 14804 : 2000 



Indian Standard 



SITING, DESIGN AND SELECTION OF MATERIALS FOR 
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS IN HILLY AREAS — 

GUIDELINES 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard provides guidelines relating to 
planning and design, as well as selection of building 
materials for construction of residential buildings in 
hilly areas. 

1.2 These guidelines are applicable to general 
residential, low rise buildings, built on individual plots 
of land, eithernon-engineered or marginally engineered 
structures. However, for industrial and special buildings 
specific requirements may have to be considered. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards given in Annex A contain 
provisions which through reference in this text 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the posibility of applying the latest editions 
of the standards indicated in Annex A. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 Engineered Construction 

Where normal planning and design practices of 
architecture and Civil Engineering are followed and 
supervised. 

3.2 Marginally Engineered Construction 

Where general design rules of thumb and specifications 
for main building elements are followed. 

3.3 Non-Engineered Construction 

Where people or householders themselves construct 
with the help of local artisans and with traditional 
methods and materials. 

3.4 Disaster Resistant Building 

Building which suffer only limited damage when struck 
by a disaster agent. 

3.5 Earthquake Resistant Building 

Building which permits occupants adequate time to 
evacuate safely in the event of an earthquake. 



3.6 Wind Resistant Building 

Building which provides a basic margin of safety against 
high wind. 

3.7 Ekra 

Straws/reeds/split bamboo x>r bamboo mat both faces 
plastered with mud and cowdung or lime and sand or 
cement and sand. 

3.8 Tarja 

Bamboo mat woven in diagonal or oblique twill pattern. 

4 ZONES 

4.1 Hilly areas in India, stretch from Kashmir and 
Himachal Pradesh in North- West to Arunachal Pradesh 
and Nagaland in extreme North-East covering the whole 
of the Himalayan range. The entire stretch of hilly 
region has wide variations in geology, geomorphology, 
climate, altitude and materials resources. The varying 
geological situations and ongoing development 
activities, climatic variation, hydrogeological conditions 
result in different types of hazards like landslides, 
avalanches, mud flows, flash floods occurring frequently 
in these areas. Among the various catastrophic 
calamities, these hilly regions also have high risk due 
to earthquakes. These areas are prone to seismic 
activity as most regions fall under seismic zones IV 
and V (see IS 1893). 

4.1 J Unprecedented exploitation of the Himalayas 
is another reason for occurrence of landslides. "North, 
North-West Himalayan areas consisting of Jammu and 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Western Uttar Pradesh 
are more prone to avalanches, earthquakes, floods 
and high speed winds. Sikkim is highly prone to 
landslides and seismic activity. North-East Himalayan 
area consisting of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura, Manipur and Assam 
are mostly affected by floods and fall under seismic 
zoneV. 

4.1.2 These hilly areas are prone to two or moretypes 
of natural calamities, such as floods and landslides, 
earthquakes and avalanches, avalanches and landslides. 
There may be overlapping of occurances of disasters. 

5 CLIMATE 

5.1 Hilly regions of the Himalayan range from North- 



IS 14804 : 2000 



West to extreme North-East fall under cold humid and 
temperate humid climate. The climatic conditions shall 
be categorised on basis of average of daily mean 
temperature and relative humidity for the month. 
Temperate 20°C - 30°C, cool 1 5°-20°C and cold < 1 5°C 
temperature, and dry 25-30, humid 50-75 and very humid 
75-100 percent humidity. 

5.2 These hilly regions are having following climatic 
conditions during the stated months. 



Month 


North 


North-East 


January 


Cold humid 


Cold humid 


May 


Cold dry 


Temperate humid 


August 


Temperate very 
humid 


Temperate very 
humid 


November 


Cold humid 


Temperate humid 



5.3 A residential building shall essentially be a form 
of protection against the external climate. The prevailing 
climatic condition shall, therefore, be a major factor 
for consideration in design of a house to ensure a 
reasonable degree of thermal comfort to the occu- 
pants. 

5.3.1 In temperate humid area shade is required but it 
shall be obtained by segregation of houses and shady 
tree plantation not very close to house. Removal of 
moisture from the surface of the skin shall be a prime 
requirement for human comfort. 

5.3.2 In cool upland regions, there is a short swing 
between seasonal temperatures and day and night 
temperatures. Design shall be influenced by that extreme 
which last the longest in the year. The design of roof 
and wall thickness, position of openings, etc, shall 
influence the human comfort conditions within the 
house. 

5.3.3 Traditionally, house facing the East direction 
are preferred by the inhabitants in North and North- 
East regions of the Himalayas. 

6 PLANNING AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

6.1 Existing housing typology shall be kept in view 
for preparation of designs for residential buildings. 
Apart from climatic conditions, the life styles, living 
habits, socio-economic levels, occupation and cultural 
pattern of habitants shall govern the house-forms. 
Generally tribals are inhabitants of these areas and 
are adhering to their traditional customs and systems 
of house building. The planning and design of a 
house shall also depend upon criteria like safety of 
domestic invasion by predators etc. 

6.1.1 As the terrain of hilly regions have vallies or 
slopes, the houses shall be either detached or semi- 
detached. Since large pockets of flat land may not be 



available, it will not be possible to attain the row housing 
concept. Moreover, living style and preference of 
habitants may not appreciate row housing concept. 
Cluster of four to six houses are common practice. 
Therefore, group housing to match the terrain 
characteristics shall be preferred. 

6.1 .2 The design and distribution of various functional 
spaces and service areas shall meet requirements of 
local building bye-laws. However, space dimensions 
and shape of building shall be controlled by breadth 
and depth ratio. The recommended ratio 2.5: 1 .0 shall 
be preferred where flat land, orientation and wind 
direction meets the requirements. 

6.1 .3 Flat land is normally not available in hilly regions. 
The houses are required to be constructed on partially 
sloping land made available by cutting and filling. It 
shall be necessary to protect the house by building 
retaining walls /breast walls [ see IS 14458 (Part 2) ] to 
avoid landslides occurring at time of earthquakes or 
heavy rains. 

6.1.4 The house forms and patterns prevailing in the 
North, and North-East states of hilly regions have 
different typology. Space for storage of fuel wood 
and granary is quite common in hilly regions. The 
salient design features of existing typology is described 
in brief in Annex B. 

6.1.5 The shape and size of the house shall be governed 
by the type of pitched roof and materials used for 
covering. The room dimensions shall be small. 

6.1 .6 There are many design features which can reduce 
the effect of the forces of high winds on a house. 
Most of the building features are contrary to ideal 
requirements for a wind-resistant house, so compromises 
in the design will have to be made. Following are 
some of features with rules of thumb: 

a) Do not build any opening which cannot be 
reached and closed off during the calamity. 

b) Provide openings in suitable locations where 
wind pressure can escape. 

c) Design the roof to reduce suction and breaking 
lifting pattern. 

d) Design corners to reduce the pressures by 
allowing wind to slip around the corners. (This 
can be done often by rounding or bevelling 
the corners of a house.) 

e) Avoid creating areas where wind can be trapped 
and excessive pressure can build up. 

f) Avoid creating courtyards or patios to reduce 
circular or turbulent winds. 

h) Provide all doors and windows not less than 
1 m from each other and also not less than 1 m 
from the end of a wall. 



IS 14804 :2000 



6.1.7 Following rules of thumb shall apply for 
earthquake resistant design: 

a) Provide uniform opening area opposite each 
other in the parallel external walls. 

b) Provide all doors and windows not less than 
1 m from each other. 

c) All doors in internal and external walls shall be 
centered, or not less than 1 m from the end of 
the wall. 

d) In case of lean to roof, the highest wall of house 
shall not be more than half metre higher than 
the opposite wall. 

e) All doors inside the house should open in the 
direction of the nearest door leading to the 
outside of the house. 

f) The thickness of mortar joint should not be 
more than 15mm. 

6.2 Site Selection 

6.2.1 There shall be three main objectives for the 
selection of sites: 

a) Safety, 

b) Developable topography, and 

c) Close to place of work. 

6.2.2 The following points shall be considered in 
making a preliminary survey of a site option: 

Access to 

a) water, 

b) service, and 

c) communication links and integration with nature 
and neighbourhood. 

6.2.3 Location 

a) In locating a house, take advantage of natural 
wind breaks such as stand of trees, small hills 
or hedges. 

b) Avoid sites on or near tall hills. Tall hills can 
increase wind speed by as much as 50 percent. 

c) Valleys tend to funnel winds creating abnormally 
high wind speeds. Therefore, efforts should 
be to avoid such sites. 

d) Building places near one another shall develop 
intense suction on the gable end of pitched 
roofs. Building shall also be spaced with small 
gaps to stabilise the flow on the lee side. 

6.2.4 Siting 

a) No house shall preferably be located closer 
than 1 m to another house. 



b) No house shall preferably be located closer 
than 10 m to a steep slope. 

c) No house shall be built on a land fill or on the 
edge of a slope known to have been levelled. 

6.2.5 Following points shall be kept in view with 
reference to particular risks. 

6.2.5. 1 Earthquake 

a) Use available data on disposition of faulting 
and spread of poor bearing soils and unrestrained 
sands. 

b) Avoid narrow ridges, steep slopes, narrow 
valleys and sites near cliffs or large gullies that 
is within 150 m. 

c) Prefer sites with hard bedrock at or near the 
surface. 

d) Prefer sites where landslides are unknown in 
surrounding area. 

e) Prefer sites where there is no sign of active 
faulting and avoid offset rock lays, row of ponds 
or swamps and deep or long cracks in ground. 

6.2.5.2 Cyclones 

a) Prefer sites away from sea coast, flood plains 
and lakesides. 

b) Following to be avoided: 

1) Low elevation relative to lagoon, river or 
surrounding land; 

2) Lack of natural outlet to discharge the volume 
of water or restriction at the outlet; and 

3) Building at the foot of slopes receiving direct 
surface run-off. 

6.2.5.3 Landslides 

a) Use all available data on disposition of risk 
area. 

b) Local geographical conditions shall indicate 
severity of risk. 

^.2.5.4 Flash floods 

a) Avoid low lying areas, wetlands and lagoon 
mouths; 

b) Avoid edges of inland lakes; 

c) Avoid flood plains and particularly the flood 
way; 

d) Avoid housing in narrow defiles upriver; 

e) Avoid downstream banks and flow ways below 
dams and particularly in earthquake areas; and 

f) Provide protective measures such as channelisa- 
tion, ponding areas, flood walls, etc. 



IS 14804 : 2000 



6.2.5.5 Snow avalanches 

a) Use all available data on disposition of risk 
area. Heavy snow fall may be associated with 
heavy rains. 

b) Prefer sites away from avalanches sites. 

c) Avoid formation of snow pockets on roof and 
on site. 

d) Design roofs with slopes greater than 50° to 
disregard snow load. 

e) Snow load shall be as per IS 875 (Part 4). 

6.3 Shape of Building 

6.3.1 A house plan of circular shape shall be ideal for 
high wind regions. 

6.3.2 A house plan of rectangular shape shall be 
evolved, provided length to width ratio does not exceed 
2.5: 1. 

6.3.3 The parallel walls of the buildings shall be of 
equal length and height. 

6.3.4 The height of building shall be minimum. 
Maximum height of double sotreyed building shall 
be restricted to be 6.0 m. 

6.4 Roof Design 

6.4.1 A pitched roof having hip and four side slopes 
is recommended. A gable roof having hip and two 
side slopes may be designed, provided adequate 
diagonal bracing is used between trusses and gable 
walls are reinforced. Flat roofs in reinforced concrete 
are recommended. Ferrocement shall also be permissible. 
Roofs made of earth supported by a wood and timber 
frame shall not be preferred. 

6.4.2 The roof pitch angle shall not be less than 30° 
or about one metre in three. Outside overhangs of 
more than half metre shall be avoided. All trusses 
shall rest on and be structurally secured to the upper 
ring beam of the wall. No truss shall rest directly on 
the wall itself. Roofing materials, sheets or tiles shall 
be secured rigidly with top ties. 

7 DISASTERS RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION 

7.1 Human settlement in urban or rural are often 
subjected to the vagaries of natural calamities such 
as cyclones, earthquakes and floods. Hilly areas face 
the risk of great disasters like landslides, floods, 
earthquake and avalanches etc. There are several 
regions which are faced with risk of combined disasters. 
The nature of damage due to natural disasters in case 
of fully engineered and partially engineered are not 
so severe as in case of marginally engineered or non- 
engineered buildings. 



7.1.1 With the advancement in the science of hydrology, 
weather forecasting and technological developments 
in the field of building materials and construction 
technology, it shall now be possible to use engineering 
principles of disaster resistant design and constructions 
with professional input in their planning, design, 
construction and supervision. Some of the following 
principles shall serve as guidelines for disaster resistant 
construction. 

7.2 High Wind Resistant Buildings 

a) Buildings shall be well anchored to their 
foundations. 

b) All elements in a structure shall be tied together. 

c) Wall to wall framing, posts, beams, rafters, 
columns, purlins, battens and roof tiles/sheets 
etc. 

d) The fixing method between elements shall be 
good enough. The method employed should 
stop the structure from breaking up into separate. 

e) The structure shall be diagonally braced. The 
bracing of roof shall also be required. 

f) Large open verandahs and part open areas shall 
be braced diagonally in the roof, and also in 
planes of the walls. 

g) The natural wind breaks such as stands of trees, 
small hills or hedges should be made. 

h) Due consideration of shape and wind direction 
shall be taken. Square shape shall be avoided. 
Corners of building shall preferably be chamfered 
to break wind pressure. 

7.3 Earthquake Resistant Buildings 

a) The shape of house plan shall preferably be 
rectangular. L, Tor U shapeplanning^hall be 
avoided. Incase unavoidable, shall be made 
by non-structural sections/units. 

b) The mud or adobe walls and brick piers, corners 
and perimeters of opening shall be reinforced. 

c) The foundations shall be continuously 
reinforced. 

d) The projections and parapet walls shall be well 
tied with main structure. 

e) The walls shall be capped by continuous ring 
beams at top and bottom. 

f) The walls and corners shall be strengthened 
by wall plasters or buttresses. 

g) H ipped roof shall be preferable. 



IS 14804 : 2000 



h) Verandah and its roof shall be structurally 
separated from the main roof. 

j) Avoid building on filled-up land or on the edge 
of aslope. 

k) The diaphragm forces in walls must be 
transmitted directly through the wall-floor 
connection. 

7.4 Flash Flood Resistant Buildings 

a) Selection of site shall be made on basis of general 
flood level. 

b) The width of openings shall be minimum for 
blocking during flood by sand bags. 

c) The structure shall be raised on stilts. 

d) Lower part of structure shall be built with 
permanent materials like burnt clay bricks in 
cement mortar, stonewalls in cement mortar. 

e) Posts (wood, metal or concrete) shall be placed 
on stone or concrete stand. 

f) Foundation design should take care of horizontal 
and vertical forces. 

8 STRENGTHENING FEATURES 

8.1 There will be often great similarity between 
recommendations to improve particular types of house, 
against different types of natural disasters prevalent 
in the region. Thus actions taken to improve resistance 
of the house against one type of disaster shall have 
beneficial results in improving its performance against 
the other type. There shall be no conflict between 
recommendations for earthquake or high wind resistant 
construction for new building designs. In such 
circumstances the most prevalent type of threat shall 
be deciding factor. Common features are given in 8.2. 

8.2 Following basic features shall be incorporated in 
design and construction of new buildings: 

a) Anchorage — It shall be necessary to hold the 
roof on. This means that the roof shall be tied 
down to the walls, or foundation by an adequate 
and continuous chain of strength. In wind- 
resistant construction, the purpose is to hold 
the roof down. In earthquake-resistant construc- 
tion, trusses shall be braced at the beam. In 
avalanche-resistant construction, design of 
roof and roofing materials shall be strong enough 
to carry the static load of snow. Smaller roof 
area and stepping shall be preferred. 

b) Bracing — It shall be necessary to brace the 
walls to withstand the lateral wind loading and 
racking effect. Strength shall be added not only 
at the corners of the building, but also at key 
locations throughout each wall. In timber 



structure, diagonal bracing, in brick or abode 
structure, horizontal and crossedtimber or metal 
members to act as bracing at top and in the 
structural wall shall be provided. 

c) Continuity — It shall be ensured that all building 
components and elements are properly 
connected so that their functions are performed 
satisfactorily. Normally, forces are often much 
larger, and in the opposite direction these shall 
require adequate provision of connections 
between members and components of a house. 

9 SAFETY 

9.1 The hazard is a natural phenomenon and is related 
to identifiable geographic areas. The design of safe 
houses shall start with the understanding of the nature 
of the hazard that has to be resisted. Hazard proofing 
of individual house is possible but shall be highly 
inter-related to the social and economic level of in- 
habitants. 

9.2 Safety Measures Against High Wind,45n<»v Storms 

9.2.1 Doors and windows shall be so designed that 
storm shutters can be placed over them during wind 
storms. 

9.2.2 Window shutters shall be so designed that gtess 
panes are relatively small. 

9.2.3 Window frame shall be so designed that if screens 
are used on the outside, they can be easily removed 
and attached to the inside to provide protection against 
flying glass or other debris. 

9.2.4 Any small room of the house shall be strengthened 
so that it can be used as in-house shelter during the 
hazard. 

9.3 Safety Measures Against Earthquakes 

9.3.1 Doors and windows shall be so designed that 
they will not fall or jam in an earthquake. 

9.3.2 All houses shall have doors which open outward. 

9.3.3 All doors inside the house shall open in the 
direction of nearest exit to the outside. 

9.3.4 High chimneys, cornices or any ornamental 
structure shall be avoided on the rooftop or elsewhere 
which can fall into the building or obstruct a door or 
window. 

10 APPROPRIATE BUILDING MATERIALS 

10.1 The choice of appropriate construction materials 
and technologies shall directly be related to the 
availability of skills and materials in a particular region. 
In determining the choice of materials to be used for 
building a house, it needs to be related to past traditional 



IS 14804 : 2000 



usage, availability in time, and on required scale the 
possibility of upgrading quality. 

10.2 The traditional/conventional building materials 
used for walling, roofing and flooring are indicated 
below. 

a) Walling — Earth, soil, wood, timber, bamboo, 
bamboo mat, corrugated galvanized iron sheets, 
stone, bricks, concrete, asbestos cement sheets, 
lime, cement, ekra, slates. 

b) Roofing — Wood, timber, bamboo, bamboo mat, 
corrugated galvanized iron sheets, reinforced 
cement concrete, concrete, thatch, asbestos 
cement sheets, slates, country tiles, lime, cement, 
plastic sheets. 

c) Flooring — Earth, soil, wood, timber, stone, 
bricks, concrete, slates, lime, cement. 

10.3 Properties of Materials 

10.3.1 From the seismic view point the following material 
properties and characteristics shall be most important: 



a) Unit weight — Lighter materials consistent with 
strength, shall be better. 

b) Strength — Compression, tension and shear 
including dynamic effects, if any, induced to 
strain rates. 

c) Modulus of elasticity including strain-rate effects. 

d) Damping value at various strain level, higher 
the better. 

e) Lateral load displacement characteristics of 
elements and components under reversed 
loading including plastic deformation. 

f) Durability — Resistance against weathering 
action, corrosion, insect attacks, etc. 

g) Fire resistance. 

10.3.2 The status of determination of the properties 
as stated in 10.3.1 for common building materials shall 
be presented in a matrix form as given in Table 1 . 



Table 1 Properties of Common Building Materials Matrix 

(Clause 10.3.2) 



SI 


Materials 


No. 




(1) 


(2) 


i) 


Adobe 


") 


Burnt brick in 




mud mortar 


iii) 


Burnt brick in 




cement mortar 1: 


iv) 


Burnt brick in 




limesurkhi 


v) 


Random rubble, 




in cement or lime 




or mud mortar 


vi) 


Dressed stone 


vii) 


Timber 


viii) 


Cement concrete 




1:2:4 


ix) 


Mild steel 



Mass Compressive Tensile and Elastic Damping 

Density Strength Shear Modulus 
Strength 

(3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

X XX 

— O O O O 



Hysterosis Highstrain 
Rate 
Effect 



Shape 

(8) 



(9) 



* Excellent, o Poor, — Fair, * No information. 



10.4 Traditional Construction Practices 

10.4. 1 Traditional building materials and their properties 
are mentioned in 10.2 and 10.3. The availability of 
these materials in hilly regions of different states and 
their predominant usage in varied items of works are 
indicated in Table 2. 

10.5 Alternate BuHding Materials 

10.5.1 New building materials developed for walling 
and roofing and found suitable after field tests may 
be permitted in the hilly regions. The performance of 
such materials, however, may be evaluated by the 
users after taking into account of engineering principles 
of disaster resistant, design and construction practices 
with professional inputs. 

10.5.2 Walling Materials 

a) Hollow concrete blocks [see IS 2 185 (Parts 
land2)]. 

b) Precast stone blocks ( see IS 1 2440 ). 



IS 14804: 2000 

c) Concrete block [ see IS 2 1 85 ( Part 1 ) ]. 

d) Stabilised soil blocks. 

10.5.3 Floor/Roofing Materials 

a) Precast reinforced concrete 'L' panel (see 
IS 14241 ). 

b) Partially precast reinforced concrete planks and 
joists (see IS 13990). 

c) Precast reinforced concrete channel units { see 
IS 14201 ). 

d) Fire retardant thatch ( see IS 1 2506 ). 

e) Aluminium/fibre reinforced plastic roofing sheets. 

10.5.4 Joinery 

a) Precast reinforced concrete frames for doors 
and windows. 

b) Ferrocement shutters. 

c) PVC Door shutters. 



Table 2 State-wise Availability and Usage of Materials in Hilly Areas 

(Clause 10.4.1 ) 



State 


Foundation 


Walling 


J&K 


Brick or stone work in mud/ 


Unbumt/burnt bricks/stone, mud/ 




cement/lime mortar. 


abode in mud/cement lime 
mortar. 



Himachal 


Stone work in mud/cement/ 


Pradesh 


lime mortar. 


Uttar 


Stone work in mud/cement/ 


Pradesh 


lime mortar. 


Sikkim 


Stone work in mud/cement/ 




lime mortar. 


West 


Stone work in mud/cement/ 


Bengal 


lime mortar. 



Assam 



Arunachal 

Pradesh, 

Meghalaya, 

Manipur, 

Tripura, 

Mizoram 



Stilts of bamboo or wooden 
poles or posts. 



Wooden stilts or piles of 
timber poles or bamboos. 
Random rubble stone masonry 
mud wall. 



Timber planks and above walls 
with thick layer of mud/lime 
plaster. 

Slate, stone in mud/cement/ lime 
mortar. 

Thick wooden beams in between 
inside mud plaster. 

Random rubble stone masonry in 
mud/cement/lime mortar. 

Mud wall, stone in mud/cement, 
lime mortar. Wooden planks. 

Mud walls stone masonry in mud/ 
cement/lime mortar. 

Wooden planks and posts. 

Plaited or split bamboo or reeds 
with equidistant poles or posts. 

Plastered with mud and cow dung 
or lime and sand. 

Woven bamboo matting or 
bamboo/wood walls covered with 
mud or 'Tarja' wattle and daub 
walls, brick walls. 



Roofing 

Gable/hipped roof made of slates 
tiles of corrugated galvanized 
sheets 

Wooden planks with thick layer 
of mud plaster. 

Sharply inclined gable roof using 
slates over wooden structure. 



Gable two sides sloped with slates. 

Gableroof corrugated galvanized 
Iron sheeting on wooden frame 
work. 

Gable roof corrugated galvani- 
zed iron sheeting on wooden 
frame work. 



Thatched slopped roof. 



Sloped thatched roof using 
bamboo and grass. 
Corrugated galvanized iron sheet 
on wooden substructure. 



IS 14804 : 2000 



11 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, SYSTEMS AND 
METHODS 

There are three main components of the house; 
foundation, wall and roof. The foundation is closely 
related with the type of walling materials and 
surrounding type of soil and roof structure is quite 
independent. Those commonally used for residential 
houses along with some variations in their materials 
and methods are described in 1 1.1 to 1 1.5.3. 

11.1 Earthen Houses 

1 1.1.1 The basic materials for construction shall be 
clayey earth either in mud lump form, rammed earth in 
wooden forms or rectangular shaped blocks, called 
adobe. Some fibrous materials like straw, hay, human 
or animal's hair shall be mixed in natural soil. Normally 
300-350 mm thickness shall be adopted for low rise 
houses. Sometimes the thickness of wall shall be 
tapered upwards. In some variations, wood elements 
or splitted bamboos shall be inserted between courses 
particularly at the corners and T-junctions of the wall. 

11.1.2 The ''Dhajji Diwarf construction in J&K region, 
pillars of adobe 600 * 600 mm in size shall be built at 
1 .5 to 2.0 m centres. The intervening space shall be 
filled with bricks or stone 

1 1.1.3 The floor shall be of wooden joists and planks. 
The joists shall rest on wooden wall plates and also 
sometimes, will have wall plates on top of them. These 
wooden wall plates shall form runners all round the 
house. 

11.1.4 A composite wall construction can be adopted. 
This will have burnt bricks on outer face and unburnt 
bricks on innerface, built in mud mortar and both are 
bonded together by header bricks. 

1 1,2 Burnt Brick Houses 

11.2.1 The basic materials for construction shall be 
clay burnt bricks hand or machine moulded and fired 
in different type of clamps and kilns. The dimensions, 
quality, strength etc, shall be as per IS 1077. 

11.2.2 The room sizes shall depend on the types of 
roof. The room width shall be restricted to 3.0 to 
3.4 m and length from 4.0 to 8.0 m where flat roofs/ 
floors are constructed with wooden joists and planks. 

11.2.3 The English bond, shall be used for the 
construction of one brick thick wall. Mud mortar for 
single storeyed and cement or lime mortar for double 
storeyed load bearing walls shall be used. 

11.2.4 Foundations shall consists of stepped type 
footings over rammed earth and brick bats. Slightly 
under or over burnt bricks shall be permitted in 
foundation. 



1 1.2.5 The one and half brick piers thickness having 
independent footing at 3.0 m centre-to-^entre projecting 
by half bricks and infill unburnt brick panels shall be 
permitted in composite construction. Wooden ring 
beams on top of walls shall be provided to receive 
the hipped roof. 

1 1 .3 Stone Masonry Houses 

11.3.1 The natural stones in masonry work shall be 
used in form of random rubble or half-dressed or fully 
dressed state. The mortars shall be cement or lime. 

11.3.2 The wall thickness shall vary from 400 to 
750 mm, depending upon loading and mortars used. 

11.3.3 Single storey laterite stone unit walls shall be 
250 to 300 mm thick with hipped roof. Rooms may be 
wide and long having inner row of wooden posts. 

11.3.4 Single storey stone house with reinforced 
concrete slab roof and 2 400 mm height shall be typical 
design. 

1 1 .4 Wooden Houses 

11.4.1 Wooden houses shall include those in which 
the main load bearing structure consists of wooden 
posts and frames although the cladding may be of 
brick or stone. The wood used in construction shall 
also include logs, sawn timber of different species as 
well as bamboo. 

1 1.4.2 The system of construction shall be classified 
into two forms: 

a) stud wall, and 

b) nogged timber frame. 

11.4.2.1 Stud wall construction shall be of wooden 
sill plates laid at plinth level and wooden posts framed 
at short distance of 800 to 1 200 mm centre-to-centre. 
The studs shall also carry wooden plates at their top. 
The corners and junctions of walls shall be stabilized 
by connections between plates and framing. The sill 
plates shall be rigidly fixed to masonry plinth by means 
of iron bolts or wires. Horizontal wooden members of 
lighter cross-section shall be inserted between the 
studs at regular intervals by notching into the studs 
or spiking to them. The roof shall be pitched or hipped 
type having wooden rafters and purlins to which the 
sheeting in nailed or bolted. The wall cladding shall 
consist of planks, sheets, boards, bamboo mats, etc. 
The panels shall be diagonally braced. 

1 1 .4.2.2 The brick nogged timber frame shall consist 
of heavy corner columns, piers or posts, sills, 
intermediate verticals at 1 000 mm centres. The wall 
plates, horizontal nogging members and diagonal braces 
in alternate panels shall be framed into each other. 
The space between framing members shall be filled 



IS 14804: 2000 



with tight fitting burnt or unburnt half brick masonry 
in stretcher bond. Flat stones like slates or laterite 
shall also be used. The roof shall be pitched or hipped 
with sheeting or tile covering. Thatch shall also be 
used. 

1 1.4.2.3 The foundation of both type of wooden houses 
shall usually be random stone masonry in mud mortar. 
These type of houses shall have an intermediate and 
attic floor for double storey ed construction. 

H.5 Concrete Frame and Infill Construction 

11.5.1 Concrete constructed houses shall include the 
method of reinforcing, a continuous, running frame 
of in-situ reinforced cement concrete. The adobes, 
hollow concrete blocks, stone blocks, concrete blocks 
or stabilized soil blocks shall be used as a non-loading 
bearing, non-structural infill. 

11.5.1.1 The house shall be constructed on strong, 
level foundation with moisture barrier. Reinforced 
cement concrete columns shall be in each corner and 
spaced at appropriate intervals throughout each wall 
and on each side of doors and windows. All columns 



shall be firmly implanted in the foundation at least 
750 mm deep. Reinforced cement concrete ring beams 
at bottom, middle and tip of wall shall be provided. 
Intersecting walls shall be joined to exterior wall at a 
vertical column. Intersecting walls shall be made 
continuous by means of the bars and or horizontal 
reinforcement that extend into neighbouring walls and 
partitions. 

11.5.1.2 In case of load-bearing structure using 
alternate huilding materials for walling as mentioned 
in 10.5.2 the construction methods shall be as described 
in 1 1.3. Additional reinforcement or mild steel bars in 
each third layer and vertical reinforced on each side 
of opening shall be provided. 

11.5.2 For alternate building materials for roofing as 
mentioned in 10.5.3 the construction methods would 
not differ. However, additional gable wall of bricks 
on joints shall be provided. 

1 1.5.3 Partially precast reinforced concrete planks and 
joists system for floor/roof shall require additional 
strengthening measures for diaphragm action. 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 2 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. 

875 (Part 4): 
1987 



1077:1992 



1893 : 1984 



2185 



Title 

Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures : Part 4 Snow loads 
(second revision) 

Specification for common burnt clay 
buildings bricks {fifth revision) 

Criteria for earth quake resistant 
design of structures (fourth revision) 



Concrete masonry units : 

(Part 1) : 1979 Hollow and solid concrete blocks 
( second revision ) 

(Part 2); 1983 Hollow and solid light weight 
concrete blocks {first revision) 

6523 : 1983 Specification for precast reinforced 

concrete door and window frames 
{first revision) 



IS No. Title 

12440:1988 Precast concrete stone masonry 
blocks 

12506:1988 Code of practice for improved 
thatching of roof with rot and fire 
retardant treatment 

13990 : 1994 Precast reinforced concrete planks 
and joists for roofing and flooring 

14201 . 1994 Precast reinforced concrete channel 
units for construction of floors and 
roofs 

14241 : 1995 Precast reinforced concrete L-panel 

for roofing 

1 4458 (Part 2) : Retaining wall for hill area — Guide- 
1997 lines : Part 2 Design of retaining/ 

breast walls 



IS 14804 : 2000 

ANNEX B 

(Clause 6.1.4) 

HOUSE FORMS AND PATTERNS PREVAILING IN DIFFERENT HILLY REGIONS 



B-l Common house types in Jammu and Kashmir have 
an east orientation. The houses are square or rectangular 
in plan. A typical feature in alt the rural houses is to 
have a small front verandah. Plinth is raised. Commonly 
the houses are two or three storeyed and multi-roomed 
tenements. Gabled roof are preponderant in these 
houses which are purposefully constructed to shed- 
off the snow. 

B-2 Generally in Himachal Pradesh, plinth is not raised, 
doors are small in size and minimum ventilation is 
provided. Ground level/floor is used for storage 
purposes and keeping catties. A TAND that is, a small 
room between two floors is designed for retiring during 
extreme cold weather. Besides, a provision for a verandah 
all around the central area is preferred. 

B-3 The house types in hilly regions of Uttar Pradesh 
are generally double-storeyed in character and multi- 
room tenments. A covered verandah on ground floor 
in front facade is an integral part of the house. Generally 
a covered balcony on upper floor is a common fea- 
ture. Raised plinth and stone flab flooring is common 
practice. 

B-4 The housing typology in the state of Sikkim and 
West Bengal is quite similar to the other hilly regions. 
The houses are multi-roomed, two or three storeyed 
structures erected with high plinth ranging from 600 
to 900 mm. Covered verandah and balcony on ground 
and upper floors respectively are common features. 
A few small holes or small windows in front walls, are 
provided for ventilation. 



B-5 Generally, house types in Assam are one roomed 
having two or three low level partitions to divide the 
available space according to functional usage. Cooking 
space is inside the room. Normally, there is an open 
court yard space in front demarcated with bamboo 
fencing. This space is used as cattle shed and granary. 
The plinth height is usually 300 to 900 mm with filled 
up earth. Floor finish is done with mud and cow dung. 

B-6 In all States of North Eastern region, the house 
types built on stilts are common. These are one-roomed 
with scare ventilation. The room-space is designed 
for built-in bed-stead along the walls, kitchen/fire place 
in the centre. The provision of TA ND (projected shelves) 
for storage is made inside the room. 

B-7 In Meghalaya, the stilt-huts are 900 to 1 200 mm 
above surrounding level. The room space is partitioned 
in 2-3 rooms. Tong-ghars of Tripura have stilt height 
between 1 200 to 1 800 mm. The house have a covered 
bamboo platform in front used as portico and uncovered 
platform at the back. 

B-8 ' AO* house of Nagaland are usually two roomed 
units with an open platform of interlaced split bamboo 
at the back. Mizoram houses are spacious single roomed 
structures with front covered verandah and back open 
verandah. 

B-9 The tribals of Arunachal Pradesh construct their- 
stilt houses with provisions of front verandah, main 
hall and back verandah. In some cases, a provisions 
of corridor all along the house to connect front and 
back is made. 



10 



IS 14804: 2000 



ANNEX C 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Chairman 

Dr Gopal Ranjan 
S-A/46, Civil Lines, Roorkee 



Members 

Shri Sheikh Nazir Ahmed 

Prof A. K. Chakrabqrty 

Shri R. C. Lakhera (Alternate) 

Chairman-cum-Managing Director 
Shri B. B. Kumar (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Dam Design) 

Superintending Engineer (Ti hri Dam 
Design Circle) (Alternate) 

Chief Engineer (Roads) 

Superintending Engineer (Ro\m)(Alternate ) 

Deputy Director General (D&S Directorate. DGBR) 
Deputy Secretary (T), IRC {Alternate) 

Director, HCD (N&W) 

Director (Sardar SARO\>Mi)(Alternate ) 

DrR. K. Dubuy 

Dr-D.S. Upadhyay (Alternate) 

Shri T. N. Gupta 

Shri J. K. Prasad (Alternate) 

Shri M. M. Harbola 

Shri P. K. Pathak (Alternate) 

Shri B. C. Borthakur 

Shri U. C. Bora (Alternate) 

Shri S. Kaul 

Shri Kireet Kumar 

Shri R. S. Rawal (Alternate) 

Prof A. K. Maitra 

Prof Arvind Krishan (Alternate) 

Shri N. K. Shangari 

Shri K. D. Garg (Alternate) 

Shri P. L. Narula 

Shri S. Dasgupta (Alternate) 

Shri K. K. Maitra 

Shri T. V. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 

Shri D. P. Pradhan 

Shri D. S. Tolia 

Shri Satish Kumar (Alternate) 

Dr K. S. Rao 

Dr Bhawani Singh 

Dr P. C. Jain (Alternate) 

Shri Bhoop Singh 

Shri B. L. Tikee 

Shri J. Gopalakrishna (Alternate) 



Representing 
Public Works Department, Jammu & Kashmir 
Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehra Dun 

National Buildings Construction Corporation, New Delhi 

Uttar Pradesh Irrigation Design Organization, Roorkee 

Ministry of Surface Transport, New Delhi 

Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council. New Delhi 

Forest Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Regional Research Laboratory, Jorhat 

Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 

G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development. 
Almora 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Engineer-in-ChieFs Branch, Army Headquarters. New Delhi 

Sikkim Hill Area Development Board, Gangtok 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

IIT, New Delhi 

University of Roorkee, Roorkee 

Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi 
Directorate General Border Roads (D&S), New Delhi 

( Continued on page 1 2 ) 



11 



IS 14804 : 2000 

{ Continued from page 1 1 ) 

Members 

Shri R. D. Singh 

Dr Sudhir Kumar (Alternate) 

Director 

Adviser {Alternate) 

Shri Lakhhir Singh Sonkhla 

Shri A. K. Soni 

Dr P. Srinivasulu 

Shri G. Jayramarao (Alternate) 

Superintending Surveyor of Works (NZ) 
Survi-yor of Works - I (NZ) (Alternate) 

Shri V. Suresh 

Shri D. P. Singh (Alternate) 

Shri S. C. Tiwari 

Shri K. Venkatachalam 

Shri S. K. Babbar (Alternate) 

Dr N. S. Virdhi 

Dr R. L. Chauhan 

Prof C. L. Dhar (Alternate} 

Shri S. S. Sethi. 
Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Representing 
National Institute of .Hydrology, Roorkee 

North-Eastern Regional Institute of Water and Land Management. 
Assam 

Public Works Department, Shimla 

Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Housing & Urban Development Corporation ( HUDCO ), 
New Delhi 

U.P. Hill Area Development Board, Lucknow 
Central Soil & Material Research Station, New Delhi 

Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehra Dun 
Regional Engineering College, Hamirpur 

Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 



Member-Secretary 

Shri D. K. Agrawai. 
Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 



12 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director <!Pttblications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc \ No. CED 56 ( 5781 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 I 323 3841 



Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 I 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

I 60 20 25 

Southern : C I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 J 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

\ 235 15 19,235 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 1832 78 91,832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



